nm0080: h-, hi everyone [0.8] welcome [1.3] this is a [0.2] part of my [0.6] s-,
you know my bid for stardom [0.6] [laughter] er [1.1] in fact what's happening 
is that we're going to video [0.4] er all the lectures on this course this term 
[0.9] er and er [0.5] send them out to Venice [0.7] 'cause as you know the 
Venetianists are [1.0] basically doing their er [0.2] their Venice stuff while 
they're out in Venice but er [0.5] if we send out this video this also allows 
them if they choose er to er [0.6] er zap into what we're doing as well they 
then play catch up when they [0.3] er arrive er arrive back [0.6] so er [0.9] 
you know obviously i've been making myself up for some er some hours er [0.4] 
er beforehand and actually can i ask you this before while we're just sort of 
waiting for people [0.4] i've just got specs for the first time [0.5] er you 
know [laughter] it's great isn't it [0.2] sort of senility advancing [0.4] and 
i've been really i've been practising in front of the mirror f-, on sort of 
spectacles technique [0.5] [laughter] and 
i want your advice on who among my colleagues has the best [0.2] technique with 
specs 
sm0081: namex [0.3] 
nm0080: does he what is what is his style then 
sm0081: oh it's on off on off off [laughter] 
nm0080: oh i'm not going to do him then [laughter] anyone else i could er [0.5] 
anyone else i could [0.2] 
sf0082: have you thought of a nice necklace [0.9] [laughter] [0.9] 
nm0080: yeah that's really senile isn't like he can't remember where he's put 
them all the time in fact i am probably going to end up with those i think 
actually that's [0.2] anyone else know other styles where i should er [0.3] 
aspire to [2.0] okay well i'm just going to say this er to start to say t-, [0.
2] t-, hello to people in Venice because er this is designed for you this video 
bit i'm going to be lecturing to this lot anyway [0.3] and i'll speak to you 
when you all get back but er [0.5] er if you can follow this then so much the 
better [0.4] i this meeting really generally is just er [0.2] a general 
introduction [0.4] to [0.3] introduce you to the idea of the course and 
to talk you through [0.3] er the [0.3] organization [0.3] and the sort of 
things we're going to be er er looking at [0.5] and er i passed around the er 
[0.4] historiography er [0.3] course details [1.3] this is a [1.0] difficult 
course [1.0] er [0.5] you will find that [1.1] it is [0.2] new [1.1] for most 
people doing history [0.3] er courses [0.7] you're used to doing history [0.6] 
and you do it [0.6] i guess [0.2] largely unreflectively [0.5] that is you just 
get on with the job [0.2] you do [0.4] you know you're set a [0.4] set a 
question what are the causes of the er [0.4] Russian Revolution [0.4] you do 
your research you find out the key er facts i guess er you make a theory you [0.
2] put an argument together [0.3] and you do it so you practice er history [0.
5] er [0.7] what we're asking you to do in this course and as i say for many of 
you it will be relatively new [0.4] is to reflect [0.5] on what you're doing [0.
4] on reflect and think about the nature [0.3] of [0.4] the historical [0.4] 
well what shall we call it shall we call it craft or shall we call it er [0.7] 
er practice or procedures or or whatever i mean we should actually think about 
[0.2] the words which we're using [0.3] er when 
talking about er [0.3] er about history [0.5] is history [0.6] a science for 
example is it is it producing forms of knowledge which are in some ways cognate 
[0.4] er to those of the social or maybe even the [0.3] the the other [0.3] er 
the physical [0.3] er sciences [0.4] or is it a [0.5] is it closer to the er 
the humanities is it more a sort of is it [0.8] sort of style of er argument 
which we would find in an English department or a literature department or a 
philosophy department [0.2] i mean what is the character [0.3] of historical 
knowledge [0.3] and how do [0.3] historians [0.5] er well again a word we could 
think about how do they [1.0] construct [0.4] historical knowledge [0.2] or how 
do they [0.7] how do they form historical knowledge or how do they find [0.3] 
historical knowledge each of these terms each of these terms [0.3] will have [0.
7] implications for how [0.4] we think about what we're doing but also [0.4] we 
will argue [0.2] er [0.3] in the course of the [0.3] er seminar [0.5] er over 
the year [0.3] er w-, [0.5] ways in which we actually think about but also w-, 
the ways in which we do [0.3] er history [0.3] er as well [1.2] and as i say [0.
3] i think 
that most of you will find it is new it is different [0.2] and it is hard [0.4] 
okay it is a different way of [0.2] proceeding that we're en-, [0.2] 
encouraging you to do [0.5] er [0.6] and if you find it hard [0.4] you can be 
reassured that you will be in good company [0.5] er especially in the early 
days because everyone finds this new everyone finds it difficult [0.4] and the 
best advice i can give you is [0.5] hang on in there [0.7] er [0.4] this is 
true i'm sure of other history courses as well [0.3] er but it's particularly 
true of this because it you are doing something just a bit different er from 
what [0.2] what the other types of history that that you've done so do hang on 
[0.2] on [0.2] hang on in there [0.6] it will hopefully [0.2] start to fall 
into place it will s-, [0.2] start to er [0.4] to gel if you like at some stage 
[0.2] er over the year that might be just a week before the exams [0.4] 
[laughter] er if you're very lucky it may be a week after the exams [laughter] 
who can tell [0.4] er but it it will it should er start happening we we've 
noticed this in the 
questionnaires [0.4] er at the end of the first term [0.3] a good percentage of 
the [0.2] of the of of you you lot are totally mysti-, i won't say totally 
mystified but semi-mystified [0.4] and the occasional totally mer-, mystified 
we come across [0.3] the others are sort of getting the hang of it then that's 
fine [0.2] go at your own pace [0.2] but do treat it seriously do take it 
seriously [0.3] for those of you who a-, er most of you obviously are doing it 
as a single honours [0.4] er subject it is a three hour exam [0.3] you need to 
take it seriously that's one [0.2] one-quarter of this year's work if you like 
[0.4] so [0.3] of all your [0.3] how many hours do you work in a week probably 
[1.2] fifty-two fifty-three i guess [0.7] thirty-two [0.4] twenty [0.2] well 
whatever it [laughter] is [0.4] er a quarter of it roughly [0.2] devote to this 
er devote to this er [0.8] course and one of the things i'd like you to do [0.
6] when y-, [0.4] doing the rest of the history [0.6] er that you're doing as 
special subjects and advanced subje-, [0.2] er an advanced option [0.5] is to 
think about the sorts of problems 
that we're bringing up here in this course and to feed them into [0.3] what [0.
2] er you're also doing in that other course [0.5] er those other courses what 
[0.2] one frequently finds in er i'm sure this isn't just true of history 
students is that they regard [0.4] each topic as sort of like hermetically 
sealed one from one from the next [0.6] well this is a topic which covers the 
whole of what you've done [0.2] this y-, or you will have done this year and 
probably all of what you've done since the since the beginning [0.3] er of your 
coming here and b-, probably back to A-level [0.2] as well [0.4] and i want you 
to [0.5] the sort of enquiringness er the sort of [0.2] i don't know if that's 
a word the sort of enquiring [0.3] mentality that we're en-, going to encourage 
you [0.3] er to adopt when looking at [0.3] the writers and the authors which 
[0.3] we're looking at on the course [0.6] try and feed those back into [0.2] 
er your other er courses [0.2] and you will also find and this is this will be 
particularly helpful [0.4] for both sides of the fence if you like [0.3] er 
that [0.3] the arrows go the 
other way as well that you [0.3] do better at this course through [0.2] 
employing that sort of more critical [0.3] er approach to your your your 
reading and your writing [0.3] when you're actually you know doing those other 
[0.2] er topics [0.3] so we're asking you to [0.5] i mean the the er [0.7] 
example i give [0.3] sometimes to to sort of s-, illustrate er [0.4] er what 
i'm talking about is [0.3] we go to the theatre don't we and we [0.7] get 
engaged in the drama [0.2] on there you know on on the stage you know and i 
don't know what is Julius Caesar so we all [gasp] you know horror or Romeo and 
Juliet we're all sobbing or whatever so we get involved [0.3] but then we what 
we could do as well and we sometimes do er but we don't enjoy doing it that 
much for more than a bit 'cause we we get so impassioned about what's going on 
on the stage [0.4] we can stand back and look at stagecraft [0.3] so we can 
look and say actually Maggie Smith she's a bloody good actress or we can look 
at [0.9] the setting [0.7] we could actually notice that er the 
spear carriers [0.3] are also the er [0.2] harlots in the brothel scene or or 
whatever you know things [0.3] things move around [0.2] er you see the stage 
carriers come in and er you know k-, s-, carrying in the er [0.4] er the 
furniture and whatever you willingly suspend belief don't you [0.3] but you 
don't have to [0.4] you can actually look at that and think about that as well 
so what i'm asking you to do [0.5] er not just on this course with the authors 
we look at [1.1] this this course [0.6] essentially because that's what the 
course is about but try it with other courses to do that stepping back [0.3] 
and say [0.4] i know what you're saying to a ab-, about an author i can see 
what the angle is [0.5] and i see [0.2] how you're sort of setting it up [0.9] 
okay you can observe the the this the the historical craft [0.4] as a craft [0.
3] and not just [0.5] go along with [0.2] the argument not just go along with 
the [0.4] the angle [0.3] er of vision which is being provided to you by the er 
historian 
nm0080: you're getting you're okay you get the idea so far what i'm saying so 
far [0.2] i know a lot 
of sceptical faces but er think about that er [0.3] theatre one i tell another 
one is when have you ever watched ballroom dancing [1.2] [laughter] wow [0.6] 
sort of er disbelief i've never seen an experience like an electric current 
through there you know as if we'd watch ballroom dancing but it is quite a good 
thing to watch actually for this particular reason because [0.4] you see this 
wonderful movement [0.4] and then if you're there you k-, [0.2] the other thing 
you can do is listen [0.3] and you hear all this feet scraping along the floor 
so you've got all this wonderful sort of romance i won't actually do it here 
for you but [laughter] er you're getting the idea [0.4] but the other thing is 
to step back and look at what's actually going on if you like what what's what 
what's the sort of infrastructure what's the [0.4] er yes you're i can see 
you're thinking this is very funny me doing this dancing [0.3] er but it is a 
good example [0.3] [laughter] okay [0.3] so [0.2] that's the 
sort of thing er er a critical distance away from your material if you like 
that's what we're encouraging you to do [0.3] and we think this is important [0.
3] for all historians that's why we ask all single honours historians to do it 
as a compulsory course [0.4] we think we can send you out on into the world as 
great historians [0.3] but most of you aren't actually going to do history 
you're going to do other things you're going to become great bank managers [0.
3] or er or or whatever [0.3] er [0.6] but [0.2] we think you should have 
thought about what you've been doing at university not just to have done it but 
to actually have a sort of more reflexive view on er a more a more sort of 
introspective but reflexive view [0.4] er on what the nature of the activity in 
which you have [0.4] gained your brilliant degrees [0.3] er in at the end of 
your er three years [0.4] okay so that's my sort of general [0.9] general take 
on it er watch out then for craft [0.2] okay think about what you're doing in 
terms of [0.2] skills [0.2] think about it in 
terms of [0.5] not [0.2] you know oh this seems a really interesting plot or as 
interesting argument which is being [0.2] offered by this historian [0.4] er er 
as a cause of the Russian Revolution or whatever but think of it how is he 
setting up that [0.3] he or she setting up that [0.4] argument [1.3] another 
angle [0.2] i would er say [0.4] and i think this is a crucial one look at the 
[0.2] language and above all look at the metaphors which people are using [0.3] 
er in historical argument [0.5] are they talking i mean you know like a wave of 
this or a wave of that [0.4] or [0.6] the facts speak for themselves or [0.2] 
the facts seem to add up [0.3] to the following conclusion [0.2] if we look and 
this is something i'll come back to and others will come back to again and 
again [0.3] just the sort of metaphors with which we talk about historical 
knowledge can be very [0.2] significant can be very revealing [0.3] about the 
way in which we think about [0.3] er the practi-, er er about the er the past 
and what we do [0.3] as er historians [1.9] so it's a v-, [0.2] it's a sort of 
workshop course this [0.3] er we are [0.3] 
encouraging you [0.2] to [0.3] er engage in [0.7] not just history and history 
[0.2] and writing of history essays but thinking about that practice as well [0.
5] and it's one in which er you will have a lecture [0.3] every week [0.3] er 
and i'll talk i'll run you through that [0.3] but you'll have a regular [0.3] 
fortnightly er seminar and the seminar things sheet should have gone round 
please fill them in [0.5] er [0.8] er [0.2] in which you'll sort of [0.2] try 
and come to terms with [0.3] get to grips with [0.3] er [0.4] sort of stumble 
hopelessly around in the ideas of whatever again metaphor you want to use [0.4] 
er some of these historians some of these historical debates which we've chosen 
to be which we think are particularly [0.2] helpful and illustrative er of some 
of the problems which historians [0.3] er er face [0.8] er the seminar i always 
say this you know the er about seminars but i think it's always true [0.4] er 
if you want to be brilliant in a seminar no one's going to stop you in fact we 
would love that you to all be brilliant all the times and most of you of course 
al-, [0.2] 
always are brilliant at all times [0.4] but essentially the work-, [0.2] the 
seminar is a workshop [0.3] where you try and get things straight where you 
just work collectively together to get things straight in your mind [0.5] if 
you th-, walk out of the er room at the end of the er [0.3] hour and a half 
thinking [0.7] well what is empiricism exactly [0.3] or er [0.5] er what does 
he mean by er sort of pragmatic or [0.3] some of these this er sort of glossary 
of terms with which i imagine you'll soon become familiar [0.4] then the 
workshop will have failed th-, failed for you the point is this is where you 
try and get things straight in your own mind and i think [0.4] just working at 
a very simple level just trying to sort of get hold of terms what is meant by 
ideas [0.4] er [0.3] don't worry about looking or feeling foolish in these 
seminars because we're all used to that and we all know each other [0.4] after 
three years anyway [0.3] er by [0.2] being foolish or acting foolish and asking 
what seem to be foolish questions [0.8] er that's actually the beginning of 
wisdom and it's good [0.2] er we you know some of the best questions the most 
problematic ones are the ones which seem simple but actually scratch them [0.3] 
and they're rather difficult so can i just encourage you [0.3] as i say to hang 
on in there [0.3] and don't be [0.5] put off by what might seem at times your 
own ignorance or your own inability to grasp because we know it is more 
difficult [0.2] we find it more difficult as well incidentally i should say [0.
4] er as historians we prefer to just get on with things rather than actually 
think about what we're doing [0.3] so we have to struggle er as well so we're 
all struggling together [0.3] er in these workshops [0.2] er and er let's keep 
that sort of atmosphere [0.3] er going [1.3] way in which we've done it well 
it's familiar to you i'm sure from all the other types of courses which you've 
followed [0.3] we basically say [0.6] there are readings each week [0.2] and 
everyone does [0.5] those readings and we use those readings as the basis for 
discussion [0.4] now some seminar leaders may ask may assign 
particular presenters [0.4] others just [0.2] you know say well you'll all read 
this and you'll all come with some ideas and i'm going to ask you about er 
those ideas [0.4] but [0.2] i think you've got to do that work you you know 
it's particularly important in this [0.4] course which is difficult anyway you 
it's [0.2] just don't free ride i don't think a seminar can take a free ride [0.
3] er with someone who says i [0.3] you know i don't think i've done the 
reading this week and er [0.3] it was too difficult so i gave up on page two or 
something like that that just won't do [0.4] even if you even if it's a 
struggle do struggle do [0.2] come along [0.2] do contribute and do do er [0.3] 
share in [0.2] er everything [0.2] er and make sure those readings are done 
we've put [0.5] we've made sure [0.2] that er there are multiple copies of i 
think everything that's crucial to the seminar readings [0.3] er in er the s-, 
the student reserve er collection [0.3] in many cases the relevant books are in 
the [0.3] er er er bookshop as well as in multiple form in the [0.3] er library 
[0.3] so you should be okay if you do 
have a problem with getting hold of anything [0.3] well go and see your seminar 
tutor and talk to him and er him or her well actually it is all him i think [0.
4] er and er [0.4] er wangle it out of er er out of them [1.0] we think that 
you will find it useful [0.5] er to buy a couple of books [0.6] er the one 
which in fact namex er namex [0.3] of spectacles fame [0.2] is going to be er 
[0.4] talking about next [0.4] next er week is a [0.2] book which some of you 
may have looked at before at school or maybe even since [0.4] which is E H 
Carr's [0.3] book [0.2] er What is History [0.3] and we recommend if you did [0.
3] look at it at school that er i don't know which edition you used but the 
newest edition which came out a couple of years is the best 'cause it has a 
very [0.3] it has good introduction and er sort of [0.4] er er textual material 
er with it [0.3] that's available as well E H Carr [0.4] the first lecture the 
f-, er we'll [0.8] talk about that and it will talk about you know [0.4] er the 
way in which Carr approached this problem still very influential book that 
actually [0.3] er thirty-four years 
on [0.3] er and it's a just a good entrée into s-, the range of issues or some 
of the issues that we're going to be looking at over over the year [0.8] the 
other one which i think i would recommend to you [0.3] at this stage would be 
Richard Evans' that's R J Evans' book In Defence of History [0.3] and that was 
written very deliberately [0.2] actually [0.3] er as a [0.9] E H Carr for the 
late nineteen-nineties [0.2] in fact if you look at it i mean he talks a bit 
about this but if you look at it you and compare it with Carr you will see that 
[0.4] very often he is almost literally [0.4] you know this is a section which 
Carr has done in this particular way this is the way it looks in the nineteen-
nineties so those two books work very well together [0.4] and Richard Evans' 
book has had a big success it has been undoubtedly it's a it's a big seller [0.
4] er it is er obviously doing the job which E H Carr [0.3] for many people 
anyway doing the c-, job of introducing people to [0.3] these sorts of problems 
[0.3] er which E H Carr did for the last [0.5] generation or 
two [0.3] er [0.6] and so we reckon that you should get hold of that as well 
and you should [0.3] you know dip into it and start reading it and hopefully [0.
2] it will become increasingly relevant as you go through [0.3] er through the 
year by the end we would hope everyone [0.3] will have read Carr and er er 
Evans and have a view on them actually a view on the two of them [0.2] and what 
they represent and their angle of vision and we may well disagree with both of 
them i hope sincerely hope you do [0.3] er 'cause i do [0.4] er but on most 
things about the books anyway but they're g-, they're they're they are very 
good introductions i think [0.3] er to the to the er course and we recommend 
that you get hold of these and buy them second-hand c-, copy or or or whatever 
nm0080: okay i'm i'm sort of going through the er f-, er the first sheet here 
just talking about seminars and seminar readings the lectures are in here it's 
a pretty awful room i'm afraid we are going to have them [0.3] er the video [0.
3] er thing is going to be er every 
week in the first er term bu-, and normally lectures are at twelve not one [0.
2] okay it's just this this w-, this week for various er [0.3] start of term 
reasons i've had to hold it at this time [1.5] er assignments or essays [0.2] 
er [1.3] three over the year [0.3] er do more if you like er we're not stopping 
you [0.2] er it might be helpful [0.3] it's up to you i'm sure your tutors will 
mark anything that you er you write [0.5] er and we've sugges-, we've got a 
list of essay titles at the back of the er list as you er can see [0.9] er and 
you will also find under each of the headings er [0.9] some other questions 
which you may use as er er as a er er questions [0.4] we would encourage you to 
think of that list of questions as not exhaustive [0.5] i mean again if you're 
getting into er the the subject er you will have other [0.4] angles and other 
things you want to e-, explore [0.3] and we would encourage that i mean do i 
think it would be advisable to chat over any question you're [0.2] inventing 
with your er [0.3] seminar tutor just to check there's no er big [0.3] sort of 
hidden 
trap in there you hadn't spotted [0.3] but generally you know [0.2] that's fine 
you know but these are guidelines by all means use er any that you [0.4] er 
like [0.3] the seminar tutor will give you the deadline so it's up to them how 
they organize it and obviously you can talk to them about how it fits in with 
your work and i'm sure you will do [0.5] er [0.4] none of them are assessed 
essays though this isn't a course on which there is any assessment [0.2] at all 
it is down to [0.3] the wire [0.3] er down to the three hour [0.3] er exam 
which you've probably all forgotten about no you haven't you just did it a few 
months ago didn't you many of you but er [0.4] er some of you are back from er 
from abroad but er [0.4] er it is a three hour exam [1.6] and the way in which 
it's framed is er there is a section A and section B you do three questions i 
should say as again is fairly standard isn't it [0.5] er [0.4] but you must do 
one question from either section A or section B and the section A [0.3] 
questions are [0.3] related to the seminar topics i mean there will be 
essentially one on each seminar topic [0.3] er more or less [0.5] but the er 
section B will be general [0.2] generic [0.4] very broad [0.2] er er er [0.2] 
titles essay essay titles [0.5] er essay questions [0.4] of the sort that we 
think you should have been thinking about and trying to come to terms with [0.
3] er over the course of the year [0.3] so again this is the sort of thing 
we're encouraging you to read through these texts [0.3] and think beyond them 
[0.3] and to think beyond them [0.3] so that when you get to that final stage 
[0.3] er you th-, you can have a view and that view will be yours [0.3] of [0.
3] whether history is a [1.0] an art or a science or whether [0.8] post-
modernism does have anything to offer the er historian [0.3] er as well as what 
you think of Robert Darnton or E P Thompson or Karl Marx [0.3] er or whatever 
so [0.6] this is why we think you know something like the the st-, er the Carr 
and the and the and the Evans will be helpful for you for you because you'll be 
able to sort of [0.4] sort of graft those into your wor-, work [0.3] over the 
course of the er [0.3] er year [1.9] i'm going to now 
switch to just going through a sort of er overview of the er course er the cour-
, course contents but is there anything on the organizational side which anyone 
would like to bring up at the er at the moment [0.5] as i say there are you 
should all t-, all have the thing which namex [0.5] namex sent round the [0.7] 
da-, you know times that you can make er you can leave those when you go out 
has everyone got [0.3] got one of those [1.2] yeah hi-, where are the spares [0.
6] er are there spares of that around [0.3] er c-, [0.3] yeah [0.3] could you 
get [0.2] get them over there please er namex [12.0] okay [0.3] any other 
points anyone like to er [0.6] bring up [0.2] these will be fixed in the next 
day and the and the times will go and times and everything will go up in the 
next day or so [0.4] so look on the er noticeboard third year noticeboard [0.3] 
sf0083: er 
nm0080: namex 
sf0083: i don't know [0.2] we don't know any of our lecture ti-, [0.2] of the 
lecture times or anything yet so [0.2] there's [0.6] 
nm0080: the you won't have a lecture in history at this time [0.5] 
sf0083: no no no i mean [0.4] we i can't 
decide when [0.2] which seminars to [0.3] and rather have a look [0.5] 
nm0080: okay do your do your best and er if there if there is a snag then come 
back and we'll we'll sort it out [0.2] yeah [0.6] yes okay now i take the [0.3] 
point yeah [2.3] but you haven't got er many many hours this year so so you 
know it should be all right [1.4] you got [0.4] endless free time [1.2] 
[laughter] er [0.2] any any other points questions anyone like to bring up 
'cause then i'll i'll switch to [0.5] looking at the [1.1] what's in there [1.
0] what's in the course what are the contents of the er course what are we 
going to be covering [0.2] over the er year [2.4] i think there is a sort of 
very very very [0.3] broad [0.5] and general sort of [0.7] chronology going 
through this and that we're starting in the middle of the nineteenth century 
and we are looking [0.3] at a r-, in a roughly progressive way at a number of 
people [0.2] for at least some of the time [0.3] but by the end by the second 
half of the [0.5] er second term we're clearly into themes which may link back 
to some of the sort of history if you like but are more 
theoretical [0.3] so there's if you like a historical [0.6] er sort of thread 
through some of what we're saying [0.2] er in other words history has evolved 
over time has changed over time [0.5] er but there is also an accumulative er 
factor [0.3] er a theoretical factor as well which will come out as more 
important in the [0.3] er in the er second half but it will be there in the 
first as well [1.0] as you can see i've put under my er first er [0.5] er fir-, 
ma-, er the first lecture why study historiography and the a-, answers i've 
given you are as you know are because [0.5] er we think it's important 
obviously that's the most important but er we think it's important because [0.
4] er [0.2] it is [0.3] good for historians to think about what they're doing 
[0.2] and also if they do that we argue [0.5] that you can become better 
historians [0.4] and that's obviously what we're doing we're trying to train 
good historians the best historians [0.3] er that we can and we think you're 
going to be [0.3] er er er better for doing this course better historians for 
doing this course [0.5] next 
week as i say namex is offering you [0.4] namex is going in and offering you er 
with the E H Carr [0.4] a [0.5] sort of [0.2] an introduction to the range of 
concerns which have been central to the to to to to the course and to [0.2] and 
to and to the discipline generally [0.3] er over [0.3] er the last couple of 
decades through this book of E H Carr [0.6] then we're going to plunge you back 
as i say into the er early er nineteenth century [0.4] to look at the work of 
and this'll be interesting actually if i could just do this [0.6] how many of 
what percentage of you have ever heard of this guy [0.2] Ranke von Ranke [1.4] 
one [0.5] okay so we're down to two [0.2] three so we're down to less than five 
per cent [0.7] fine [0.2] so you so going to be a sort of voyage of discovery 
for everyone isn't it that week [0.3] who is this guy well [0.3] he is seen as 
he's often sort of you know the sort of phrase which people use the father [0.
3] of modern empirical history [0.4] he is the guy who says that the 
historian's task or does he because that's one one of the things we'll be 
looking at [0.4] the historian's task is to find those facts find those things 
which really happened [0.2] so that you can create [0.5] er a sense of what 
things really were like [0.2] er in the past from those from those sort of 
facts which you discover about the past so you don't [0.6] you don't sort of 
import your own ideas you find how things actually were in the past and er [0.
4] by accumulation of facts found in archives [0.2] and Ranke is that's one of 
the things that's also important about him [0.4] he sort of er [0.3] locates 
his [0.7] his facts if you like within the archive of governments [0.2] and 
that's an interesting point where are facts what are facts this is something 
James will look at er next week er but but you know Ranke in some ways is the 
[0.5] sort of paradigmatic figure the sort of prototype of the historian who 
says [0.7] to answer a historical [0.4] question let's find out the facts first 
[0.2] don't need to you know think about too much just find the facts and then 
the [0.2] the answers will [0.2] become apparent [0.4] if 
you like [0.5] that is the way in which Ranke is often presented we will argue 
er [0.3] i think most of us er [0.3] when you actually look at him when you 
actually scratch the surface there are all sorts of other very interesting and 
quite [0.3] contradictory things happening in Ranke [0.3] but we reckon that y-,
you know to come to terms with some of the debates going on about facts [0.4] 
and facts versus theory [0.2] and all the rest of it you've got to know [0.2] 
and you've got to have read [0.3] er von Ranke and so there's a good starting 
point [0.4] er we think for this [0.3] er for this course 
nm0080: we then look at obviously one of the the other giants the intellectual 
giants of nineteeneth century who has been [0.4] tremendously influential i 
think you know [0.6] let let's say ten years ago [0.2] i would say [0.2] if you 
looked at the historical [0.4] er at the practice of history worldwide [0.4] 
practice of history worldwide in nineteen-ninety n-, just s-, call it nineteen-
eighty-nine i think [0.4] er [0.5] the most influential the most widely 
practised er form of history 
would be Marxist history [0.4] that was mainly of course because there was a 
whole solid block of countries which were solidly [0.4] er er Marxist and so 
history was seen through a Marxist prism but even in [0.5] er the non-Marxist 
West Marxism has been tremendously influential [0.4] er on the practice of of 
history and has influenced a great many of us [0.4] er for example in our 
generation and er [0.5] why am i talking about our generation it's their 
generation i'm the youngster of course in the department but er [0.3] er within 
the i'm joking [0.3] er just in case you hadn't spotted [0.3] [laughter] er [0.
3] er influenced us in tre-, tremendously important ways now of course in the 
nineteen-nineties that looks very very different [0.3] very different indeed so 
[0.3] is there anything in Marxism and the practice of Marxist history if you 
like [0.4] which is [0.9] recuperable [0.2] if you like for the practice of er 
of history in the late er twentieth century we'll also think it's important to 
describe what Marx said and you know the influence the 
way in which er [0.2] historians have used him that will be part of the story 
but we will also be encouraging you to think about [0.2] the value of Marxism 
as a [0.2] as a body of d-, of of theory [0.3] if you like which is it helpful 
[0.3] is it not helpful how can we use it can we [0.5] can we is it roadworthy 
if you like or has it been consigned to the dustbin [0.3] of history with all 
those [0.2] Marxist regimes [0.3] er er er worldwide [0.2] as well so Marx we 
think you've got to come to terms with Marx if you're a historian [0.3] even if 
things ha-, the world has changed and changed quite a lot [0.4] er since 
nineteen-eighty-nine [1.0] you've also got to come to terms we argue and that's 
why we think we've er we've we've got it next with with Weber because in some 
ways [0.4] Weber is the other intellectual giant of the ni-, late er nineteenth 
century who's in constant dialogue with [0.4] with Marx [0.3] over [0.2] what 
causes history what what what are the sort of causative factors [0.3] er in 
history Marx i'm i won't be i'm sure telling you anything [0.4] er new 'cause 
you'll remember this from basic one days if you haven't forgotten [0.4] er 
basically argues that it's the sort of [0.3] it's the economic infrastructure 
within society which really [0.3] is the sort of fundamental cause of [0.3] of 
historical phenomena [0.4] er [0.2] the class [0.2] struggle is the motor of 
history [0.3] if you want to know how why and how things change [0.3] you look 
for the [0.3] the economic base [0.3] to particular [0.3] er social [0.3] 
bodies or social formor-, [0.2] for-, formations or phenomena [0.3] er or 
whatever so this emphasis on the material [0.4] the economic [0.7] er th-, er 
[0.5] Weber er [0.4] in dialogue with Marx because in some respects they're 
they are very similar [0.4] but the text which we've chosen th-, it's probably 
Weber's most famous The Protestant er [0.4] er er Ethic er where he argues that 
[1.2] you can't explain the refor-, something like the Reformation without [0.
2] resort to and thinking about [0.4] values within society in other words it's 
not enough to always assume that that [0.3] that [0.4] that that ideas and 
policies and politics and er theories and what i 
ever-, [0.4] are the sort of [0.3] er [0.3] er reflection [0.7] of something 
which is going on in the base of society [0.5] that [0.4] ideas themselves have 
their own dynamic have their own substance which can also [0.3] er er affect 
the way in which things er [0.3] things change now in some ways that's not s-, 
actually as we'll argue or we'll think about i think [0.4] so very far from 
some er some versions of Marxism [0.4] but [0.5] again if you want to know 
about how prac-, history has been practised in the twentieth century and it to 
a certain extent still is practised [0.3] then we have to think about Weber and 
we have to know a bit and we have to have read a bit [0.3] of Weber and we 
think that's why that's er that's particularly er [0.3] important [1.5] we 
shift er after Weber to look at one of the earl-, the great practitioners of [0.
4] er medieval history [0.3] er French historian Marc Bloch [0.5] er and [0.2] 
the way in which we do that is through the [0.5] historical periodical the 
Annales [0.4] which he and er another man called Lucien Febvre [0.5] founded in 
nineteen-twenty-nine which 
again i would say you know w-, you know very broad generalization obviously [0.
5] but is probably the most important er historical journal [0.6] in er 
twentieth century you can quote me on that but [0.3] everyone would say i was 
wrong but i think it's er i think it's not far wrong it is enormously 
influential [0.4] it's er [3.0] in some ways [1.1] er the argument that i'll 
make when looking at the Annales [0.3] is say is to is to s-, is to suggest 
that er [0.5] what [0.3] Bloch and Lucien Febvre and those who sort of come 
round the banner [0.3] of the Annales style of history [0.4] in the nineties-
thirties forties fifties and throughout 'cause it's still going [0.7] are 
historians who say [0.3] the type of Rankean history the type of Rankean 
history [0.4] which has [0.2] which dominates the [0.3] the er historical 
establishment because [0.2] by the time they're writing there are [0.4] 
universities which have [0.2] history departments that's something actually 
which is [0.2] really quite interesting actually and f-, [0.3] er is part of 
the sort of professional [0.4] er the the the 
development of the profession as well as a [0.3] er er as a discipline [0.5] er 
[0.3] that type of department is obsessed with small scale [0.3] eurocentric 
political governmental history and what the Annales are trying to do [0.3] is 
to break open that type of very hermetic sort of empirical history [0.5] er and 
suggest that what we need to understand the past [0.3] is to think about [0.4] 
economics sociology psychology to have if you like a [0.4] a a broad [0.3] sort 
of flowing together of different disciplines where history actually benefits 
from [0.3] learns from [0.3] and actually can sort of change its own practice 
[0.2] as a result of what's going on [0.2] in other [0.2] er disciplines [0.3] 
okay i take the example of [0.3] Marc Bloch but we also look at Fernand Braudel 
[0.3] whose greatest book [0.2] without any question of a doubt is [0.3] called 
The Mediterranean [0.3] and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip the 
Second [0.4] and the principal actor [0.3] in that the principal agent the 
princ-, principal actor [0.3] er in that drama massive two volume drama which 
he [0.2] which unfolds 
in that book is [0.5] not a king not Philip the Second he's just an afterword 
in many ways [0.3] it is a sea [0.4] it is the Mediterranean [0.2] so how do we 
think about that geography [0.2] and history in other words so-, in sort of 
close [0.2] confluence in c-, close sort of er [0.4] er mutual and reciprocal 
[0.3] er influence [0.4] so a different type of history a m-, history more 
opened out onto [0.2] new objects new approaches [0.3] er [0.3] more friendly 
towards [0.2] er the other [0.2] er disciplines and trying to learn from them 
and er and to alter practice [0.3] er as well [2.0] we then [0.4] by the end of 
the thi-, of that f-, this first term [1.0] we sort of shift gear again [0.5] 
and look at [0.5] and this is a particular namex thing but er it's a namex 
thing which [0.4] we're privileged to it's a namex thing actually [0.3] because 
we look at the work of E P Thompson who was professor of history here in the 
early days of er [0.5] er [0.4] er of of of namex University [0.5] er [0.2] his 
work The Making of the English Working Class and let's actually try that let's 
er anyone tha-, tha-, tha-, h-, who's heard of [0.2] E P Thompson [0.7] 
yeah good okay right wh-, er in what context have you heard of him [1.4] anyone 
[0.2] just heard his name [0.2] yeah [0.9] people ba-, in the department 
banging on about him or er [0.4] more than that [2.3] which w-, [0.4] which 
course have you heard that on [0.3] heard him 
sf0084: social and economic 
nm0080: right [0.3] right [0.3] within History department who's [0.8] any 
courses [0.8] no [0.6] just heard of him okay that's fine [0.7] er i'd say his 
book er Making of the English Working Class [0.4] probably the most read 
history book in British universities history departments [0.4] in the er 
nineteen-seventies it was [0.3] sensational incredibly important [0.7] we look 
at actually a later work of his er Whigs and Hunters but what we're [0.3] 
looking at and trying to explore with you is not just [0.5] a moment [0.2] a 
moment in historical [0.4] er [0.4] the development of the historical d-, b-, 
discipline over the last thirty or forty years [0.4] er but also a type of 
history [0.2] which we think [0.4] you want to think about and interrogate [0.
4] and that is a history which is politically 
engaged [0.5] Thompson [0.3] makes no [0.9] bones he makes no disguise of the 
fact that he is [0.3] he claims to be a Marxist but certainly [0.3] a socialist 
as well and tries to write a socialist [0.3] history [0.4] now how does that 
chime in with how does that [0.4] er work itself out [0.4] er in terms of a 
discipline which many of whose practitioners claim to be objective [0.4] and to 
be able to [0.3] be value neutral [0.4] er if you like [0.3] er in terms of 
what they're what they're doing 
nm0080: er [0.2] this i'm sure is something which you've come across already in 
many of the [0.4] many of the er essay questions which you've looked at you've 
thought about [0.3] the [0.4] the nature of the historian and his or her 
political sympathies and how these might affect [0.3] er the views the 
approaches the conclusions [0.3] of those historians so we wo-, we think this 
is a very good [0.6] er [0.6] er sort of case study for you to come to terms 
with and think about this question of [0.6] objectivity and political 
engagement and how this affects the nature [0.3] of the historical enterprise 
and [0.2] and the 
character of historical knowledge [0.3] er as well [2.7] one of the things 
which i think is particularly striking about E P Thompson [0.3] is er the er [1.
1] he's a Marxist but [0.3] gives much more attention to [0.2] the cultural [0.
4] er dimension [0.2] than than er many other Marxists who in some ways some 
forms of me-, Marxism are essentially [0.3] economic reductionism everything is 
explained in terms of the base [0.6] er or the the infrastructure [1.0] 
Thompson is one of those who says yes the cultural does matter [0.2] we have to 
think about class struggle class struggle's still important [0.3] er the 
material world is still important but [0.7] culture and ideas do have their own 
sort of er impetus er which we need to understand [0.3] er er er as well [0.7] 
and we go on from the Thompson [0.2] er er seminar to look at [0.5] er what 
i've called here the new cultural er history [0.4] which is a history which [0.
3] is [0.9] i if w-, if one's thinking a moment i guess one's thinking the 
seventies and particularly the eighties [0.5] er where [1.2] suddenly [0.3] the 
sorts of history which beco-, which 
are hottest which are most people are interested in t-, [0.4] that most people 
want to read [0.4] are not so much the social history of the sort of [0.7] 
Thompson Hobsbawm [0.4] er generation [0.2] or whatever [0.2] but new versions 
of cultural history which are thinking of culture not as a [0.4] a sort of you 
know ensemble of precious artefacts you know great er [0.4] er great pianos i 
have known or you know great [0.3] pictures or Canalettos or whatever [0.4] 
they're thinking about culture in essentially an anthropological [0.3] sense 
okay and in fact it is an anthropologically informed history [0.3] that we try 
and understand the past in other words [0.3] using the sort of [0.3] tools [0.
6] in the anthropologist's er [0.4] er toolbox [0.5] and the [0.2] the case 
study which we look at [0.3] er there [0.3] and we ask you to read about is a v-
, [0.4] er a [0.4] brilliant essay actually [0.2] a really wonderful er little 
essay [0.4] er by Robert Darnton which is called The Great ket-, Cat Massacre 
[0.5] where he starts from [0.4] er this [0.4] event which happens we happen to 
have a r-, record of it in er Paris in the about [0.3] about 
seventeen-thirties seventeen-forties [0.6] where [0.2] apprenti-, there's this 
whole story but basically the the centre of it that [0.4] apprentices in this 
wor-, er sort of er workshop [0.6] all b-, [0.2] get together and they kill 
enormous amount amounts of cats [0.2] and have an enormous bonfire of cats [0.
3] and they think this is probably the funniest thing that's ever happened in 
their lives that's what they say when they're talking about it [0.8] so what 
Darnton says and this is an anthropological take if you like an angle he says 
well [0.5] why [0.3] what's the joke [0.4] how you know we in the we find it 
rather difficult to i hope we do anyway to er [laughter] understand er [0.4] 
the joke [0.3] in you know massacring poor little innocent pussies you know but 
[1.0] what is going on here what does what h-, how can that be a door [0.4] er 
sorry a w-, a key which will open a [0.7] oh God i'm getting my metaphors 
hopeless here oh dear [0.3] but basically how can we go from that to understand 
something about the way in which that society thinks [0.6] and reacts [0.3] to 
itself to the natural world to ideas about [0.2] what what [0.3] are cats for 
[0.5] er why why cats why not dogs why not rats for hea-, what what's so funny 
about [0.3] cats [0.3] so [0.4] he's he's [0.4] taking if you like [0.3] 
something which is [0.3] unfamiliar he's defamiliarizing the past but in a way 
[0.2] which will help us to understand and to sympathize and empathize with it 
so i think it's a very good example [0.4] of as i say a sort of [0.2] the 
cultural turn or it's sometimes called [0.3] er [0.3] the new type of cultural 
history which is evolving in the seventies er and eighties [1.4] how many of 
you have heard of Darnton [1.0] no one [0.5] yeah [0.2] a few four or five yeah 
[0.2] okay [0.4] how about the the next chap we're looking at Michel Foucault 
[1.5] yeah so it's about er t-, twenty per cent what about Edward Said [1.3] 
yeah a bit smaller maybe er mm less than ten per cent well these again are [0.
4] critical figures i would say of the eighties [0.5] neither is a historian [0.
4] er Foucault is a philosopher by training but who does history [0.5] Said is 
a literary [0.2] er er ek-, 
expert specialist [0.3] who does history as well [0.6] and [0.5] basically what 
they are looking at and i think what makes them so influential and important er 
in the er [0.3] way in which history has been wr-, wr-, written because they 
are both incredibly influential er in the eighties and into er the nineties [0.
4] is that they [0.2] worry about [0.2] and [0.2] concern themselves about [0.
3] questions of power [0.7] power [0.5] power is at the sort of heart of both 
[0.3] Foucault [0.3] and Said's [0.2] er work if we looked at for example some 
of the social history something like Thompson [0.6] he's interested obviously 
in power but for him the crucial thing is what's going on out there in the 
world in you know the class struggle out in society [0.5] er with fouc-, both 
Foucault and Said they're much more interested in how [0.5] m-, [0.2] power 
operates as a mechanism and is [0.6] controlling of individuals how it sort of 
er [0.5] er sets the agenda if you like for social activity and social er 
change [0.7] what Foucault does and er you you'll all read and be rather well 
it's a rather 
sickening course this actually come to think of it 'cause we've got a cat 
massacre [0.4] [laughter] and then the following week of course we do er [0.4] 
following er seminar is on er [0.5] er Foucault's Discipline and Punish and the 
opening chapter the introductory chapter there [0.3] some of you may i've m-, 
[0.2] talked about this to some of you i'm sure [0.3] before is this incredible 
scenario where he s-, talks about the [0.7] way in which [0.2] Damiens who's a 
would-be assassin who tried to assassinate Louis the Fifteenth in seventeen-
fifty-seven [0.4] how he's actually [0.4] executed [0.4] and it's you know sort 
of hanging and drawing and then they [0.2] chop bits off and then they attach 
horses [0.4] to each of the [0.2] limbs and they sort of whip the horses so 
he'll sort of be [0.4] sort of [0.4] spread all over the place and then the [0.
4] his limbs won't come out so the axe man has to go with a it's utterly 
revolting [0.5] [laughter] er [1.1] and then in the same chapter he switches to 
the [0.7] regime of 
imprisonment which he says comes in particularly with the French Revolution but 
which is one [0.2] which he says is new [0.2] where basically [0.7] he 
describes [0.4] prisoners' life in a [0.2] in a in a jail [0.5] from the 
seventeen-nineties [0.4] this sort of [0.3] bureaucratic neutral [0.2] colourf-,
[0.3] colourless [0.9] utterly dehumanizing sort of regime [0.3] er which 
exists er then and it's [0.2] round those two moments [0.5] that er [0.3] 
Foucault so seventeen-fifty-seven horrible sort of [0.6] violence er as ax-, 
you know as punishment [0.2] as opposed to [0.2] not violence just [0.6] loss 
of liberty and this sort of control of the individual [1.2] around those two 
moments that [0.3] Foucault constructs the story of power and how power changes 
and how power operates [0.3] differentially between the two periods [0.3] in a 
way [0.2] after reading the prison you think [0.7] God those days of Damiens 
that must have been the good old days you know it was great in those days sort 
of nostalgic for this type of thing [0.2] it is a very very interesting very 
chilling [0.2] sort of er discussion 
you don't have to go along with all the arguments [0.3] er but this 
concentration on power i think is enormously important [0.4] with Said [0.5] er 
the emphasis i think would be on [0.4] and this is one of the reasons we're 
particularly interested in it not just the way in which power operates [0.3] 
within [0.5] within the sort of er advanced p-, political systems of the West 
but within er er an imperial context [0.4] Said's book Orientalism is about the 
way in which power [0.2] and discourses of [0.5] er languages about [0.3] er 
about what the Orient is can be very determining and very sort of powerful [0.
3] er in restricting er political and social and whatever options i'm sorry i'm 
rushing through that a bit but don't worry [2.0] the next seminar we look at 
another angle which i think has been enormously influential in the last er f-, 
couple of decades and that is women's history and the history of gender again 
this won't be new to you i'm sure you've all done it in some of your courses [0.
6] is the name Joan Scott who's the person we [0.4] 
er looking at particularly is is she n-, is her name known to you [1.0] no [0.
3] that's okay [0.2] God you we've got a lot of stuff to cover er i can see 
that's that's good so it'll all be new it'll be exciting [0.3] and innovatory 
for you all [0.4] er 
nm0080: history [0.2] the argument goes circa nineteen-seventy [0.4] has been 
about men [0.5] women are hidden from history [0.3] how can that be [0.4] er [0.
2] is this because of the historical profession nearly all of them are men [0.
5] er or is it because [0.2] it's more difficult to do the history of women 
which actually it is [0.4] er or is it bec-, is there a political agenda [0.2] 
going on there and one o-, and er and [0.2] one it was a very i-, political act 
i would say [0.3] of early feminist historians [0.3] er to really sort of force 
the history of women into the [0.4] into u-, u-, under the spotlight of the 
historical profession er er er [0.3] as a whole and that was actually r-, there 
was a lot of resistance to that [0.3] er but generally i would say that's more 
or less er [0.2] er happened now but [0.8] what it means how you can write a 
history of women [0.6] or do 
you just [0.4] sort of like do a history of men do a history of women surely [0.
3] and this is the important sort of shift that we'll be looking at as well [0.
4] surely what we should be doing is not just doing the history of men and then 
the history of women [0.3] but surely we should be doing the history of gender 
[0.6] in other words we need a more processual or relational [0.3] sort of er 
history which takes into account not just [0.3] the experiences of one segment 
of hist-, er of er humanity whether masculine or feminine [0.4] but which er 
actually is concerned with [0.3] and focuses on the relationships and the way 
in which that is er er constructed so that again [0.4] this question of women 
and gender [1.8] in the final [0.2] er thing we'll be looking at post-modernism 
[0.2] er [0.3] i haven't gone on about this much [0.2] er today [0.4] er but 
you'll see if you read er Richard Evans' if you get er involved in Richard 
Evans' book on In Defence of History [0.8] post-modernism is not just er [0.6] 
a [0.4] species of er architecture or er cultural life or popular 
culture or whatever [0.4] it's also having a an impact on the way in which 
history is er [0.4] er er written [0.4] a-, and what and debates on what the 
role of [0.4] theory [0.3] and er [1.1] er ideas is [0.3] er on the on the 
practice of er [0.3] of history [0.4] i would say if you're interested in this 
er [0.5] er to start with er if you want to [0.8] sort of get a flavour of what 
the post-modern d-, most post-modernist debate on history is [0.4] you could do 
worse than look at some of the writings of Keith Jenkin which again we've 
recommended er er on the book list and which i think you'll find [0.4] er very 
helpful 'cause in some ways he is the most vocal [0.3] of those who say [0.3] 
the type of history which we've been doing s-, so far it's not just that it's 
been [0.5] you know all about men and not women or j-, all about the upper 
class rather than the lower class or all about Europe rather than the rest of 
the world [0.5] er [0.3] it is that the very that the historian has sort of set 
himself up or sometimes herself up [0.3] as someone who's somehow distant [0.4] 
above over and above the 
historical [0.2] facts whatever those are [0.3] which are [0.3] actually below 
them which they can assemble and accumulate and form their theories [0.3] what 
they are arguing is that that is a ridiculous description of what actually is 
going on that in fact the historian [0.4] brings into the practice of history 
their own values their own ideas [0.2] and these are sort of [0.4] bouncing 
around in those of the [0.2] er period in which they're [0.2] er they're living 
in other words there is a politics in history [0.2] however much historians may 
think [0.3] you know [0.3] they're wanting to be neutral and value free and 
objective and all the rest of it there is a politics [0.3] floating around 
which we have to grasp because if we don't grasp we'll be [0.2] easily fooled 
[0.3] er by it and i think that's a very interesting sort of debate that's 
going on [0.4] in history [0.4] as historians in the late nineteen-nineties the 
turn of the ce-, [0.2] of the ce-, of the millennium [0.4] i would say we are 
living in interesting times [0.4] er [0.4] the debate is very interestingly 
poised on what historical knowledge is [0.3] er and the [0.3] the role of er [0.
4] after a a a number of decades in which there's been a questioning of 
historical method but generally a broad consensus [0.2] about the way in which 
the practice of history works [0.4] there is a sort of whole [0.2] angle a 
whole raft of arguments coming in from the post-modernist camp [0.4] which are 
putting a very big question mark [0.3] against the nature [0.2] er [0.3] of 
historical [0.2] knowledge and indeed the whole character [0.3] of the 
historical enterprise and that's something [0.4] which as i say you can plunge 
into straight away if you choose but [0.3] you wi-, we will be back on that 
terrain [0.3] at some stage [0.2] er over the er [0.2] er over the course [0.5] 
so i get that s-, look of sort of [0.4] sublime bafflement which i'm very 
familiar w-, o-, on this course with er er er at the start [0.3] but it will [0.
2] recede i will see [0.3] er other glances as times goes on [0.3] if you got 
any questions er individually just pop down the front and m-, make sure [0.2] 
please you leave at the back on the back desk there [0.4] er your timetables [0.
3] thanks very much 
