nm0638: you may remember last time [0.2] we were talking about some [0.3] key 
aspects of natural resource use [0.8] er [0.4] we said that we would look at 
the element of scarcity [0.7] we looked at time and dynamics and the effect 
that [0.6] those things have [0.2] on resource use [0.9] we looked at 
technology [0.5] we spent a few minutes talking about property rights [0.4] and 
then we had a bit of a recap [0.4] looking at various sources of uncertainty [1.
0] er surrounding our decisions concerning the use of natural resources [0.4] 
over time [2.7] we return [0.5] to the issue of scarcity [6.2] and we started 
off by saying that really the [0.3] the fundamental [0.2] resource use issue [0.
7] is that we have a rapidly rising [0.5] global population [1.6] increasing [0.
2] economic activity [0.2] by that population [1.3] resulting in a declining [0.
2] resource base [0.8] and an increased [0.3] production [0.3] of wastes [0.6] 
and therefore [0.4] an increased burden if you like on the environment [0.3] to 
assimilate [0.2] those wastes [1.5] so that's where we left it [0.3] last time 
[1.3] this time i want to continue to explore this issue of scarcity a little 
bit more [0.5] and 
then to go on to [0.4] develop a very simple framework [0.7] er where we can 
actually try and determine the optimum [0.3] resource use [0.6] er over time [7.
3] you may remember at the start of [0.8] last week [3.2] where we were 
reminding ourselves of [0.3] the role of economists [0.5] in [1.1] the 
environment and resource use [0.5] we said well this is [0.5] the simple view 
of the world that economists have [1.6] we look at resources as inputs to the 
production system they're transformed [0.3] into goods and services that we 
want to consume [0.7] and we said that really that was a rather inadequate 
framework [0.4] when we start to want to consider environmental issues [1.0] 
within economics [3.0] because what we have [1.8] in fact [0.6] is a whole 
series of waste products [0.3] produced [0.3] not only by the production system 
itself [0.8] but b-, by the very process [0.4] of getting resources for 
instance out of the ground from mining resources [0.7] and from the process of 
consumption [0.2] we produce all sorts of wastes [0.3] from these three [0.2] 
elements [1.0] associated with the production process [2.4] and we have no 
economic 
framework within which we can [0.2] directly [1.1] consider [0.3] the problem 
of producing wastes [0.2] we noted last week that what we called these things 
were externalities [0.4] negative externalities [0.3] problems that lie outside 
effectively [0.3] of our normal economic framework [0.4] and which somehow now 
we need to take account of [0.2] because these things are causing us problems 
[9.4] okay look a little bit of science mixed in with economics here [2.2] the 
first law of thermo-, thermodynamics [1.5] really just says that energy and 
matter [0.6] can't be destroyed [4.3] energy and matter [0.2] can't be 
destroyed [4.6] so that ultimately the resources that you use [0.6] will end up 
[0.2] being [0.2] various types [0.3] of different waste [34.4] one thing that 
we know that we can do [1.2] for many natural resources [0.8] is to actually 
recycle some of these wastes [0.6] and get back some of the resource input [0.
3] that we can then use again [1.0] so if we want to start to incorporate those 
elements into our simple framework [0.2] it might look something like this [4.
2] so here's 
our resource inputs [0.5] the production process [0.3] consumption that's our 
standard [0.3] economic model [3.0] we note [2.3] the production of wastes [0.
2] from this process [1.8] but now we've added [0.2] another element [2.4] that 
we can actually recycle some of these wastes [2.3] to produce more resources [4.
0] there are two things that this diagram [1.3] takes account of [2.1] in 
addition [3.6] one is the second law of thermodynamics [6.1] which just says 
that resources [0.2] are used entropically [0.8] in other words they're 
dissipated [2.0] so think of [0.3] the use of [0.2] oil say [0.4] fossil fuel 
like oil [2.3] it has loads of different [0.5] outputs doesn't it [2.2] it 
produces energy that we want yes but it produces loads of other emissions in 
all sorts of [0.2] of other by-products C-O-two and so on [0.4] and you can't 
capture those back [2.0] combine them again [0.2] and get the fossil fuel back 
the oil back again can you that's obvious [1.4] resources are used entropically 
they get dissipated some dissipated into the environment and so on [0.4] so 
this [0.3] simple [0.3] formula here is just saying [0.2] that you can never 
recapture [0.3] 
however good you are at recycling your waste [0.5] you can never recapture the 
whole amount [0.5] of the resource again [1.0] which is pretty obvious i guess 
[1.3] and that's what this diagram takes account of [0.4] because here it says 
look [0.2] however good your recycling [0.6] some of these wastes are going to 
end up in the environment [1.4] into the into the sink if you like [0.2] of the 
environment [0.2] we talk about environmental sinks [2.0] the other thing this 
diagram takes account of [0.5] is the fact that recycling itself [0.8] is a 
resource using activity [2.1] okay recycling itself [0.2] is a resource using 
activity [0.3] which is why we've got this red dotted line [1.2] yeah showing 
that there's a resource input into the recycling process itself [2.3] and 
occasionally you get [0.2] crazy situations [0.8] where recycling is such a 
great idea people think [0.3] that they actually end up using more resources in 
the recycling process than they're actually saving [22.0] okay [0.2] any 
questions about that [6.2] okay let's have a a brief and very simplistic look 
because 
these two sessions are [0.2] introductory sessions for this course [0.5] a 
brief and and rather simplistic look [0.5] at [0.4] natural resources and their 
characteristics [2.6] and very very briefly [0.8] i'm going to look at [0.7] 
air land minerals water [0.4] ecological resources [0.6] and i probably won't 
look at [0.2] er solar power or or [0.5] sun [0.8] to any great extent at all 
[13.0] so if we start looking at air first [7.1] i said it was going to be 
simplistic why is air important to us well first of all it's a source of 
nutrients [1.6] for plant and animal species [3.0] secondly it's a sink for 
pollutants [0.6] we pump all sorts of stuff into the air don't we use it as a 
sink for pollutants [2.3] it's important for atmospheric protection in the 
climate system [4.7] it's an important energy resource [2.4] wind power [2.1] 
and it's im-, an important spatial medium to state the obvious [7.7] and these 
figures aren't really worth getting down because they're just [0.4] 
illustrative [0.5] and i've already given you [0.3] some ideas of reading [0.3] 
and the United Nations er Environment Programme website 
where you can get [0.5] er [0.2] data like this probably more up to date data 
now as well [4.0] but i just picked out some pollution figures [1.5] for some 
of the major cities [0.3] of the world [2.0] so we've got London Sydney 
Montreal New York Beijing [0.4] and Delhi [2.9] and this first column [2.3] 
looks at the number of days of the year [0.5] when sulphur dioxide levels [0.4] 
are above [0.9] a certain limit [2.1] think that's a hundred-and-fifty 
micrograms per metre [0.3] cubed [3.1] and we know that above that limit [0.7] 
it will [0.5] have [2.0] a negative effect on human health [0.7] on the [0.8] 
far [0.2] column here [0.3] we've got the level of [0.6] particulate matter [0.
8] yeah particles in the air [1.5] er again the number of days that they're 
over a certain [0.3] critical level and again [0.2] that critical level we know 
[0.4] will cause health problems [0.3] in the population [1.6] so you can see 
in London over the time that this survey was [0.2] er taken [0.4] er [0.8] out 
of the year seventeen [0.2] seventeen days [0.4] in London where S-O-two levels 
were too high eleven in Sydney [0.4] thirty-two Montreal twenty-two New York [0.
3] a hundred-and-fifty-seven [0.2] in 
Beijing [0.7] forty-nine [0.2] in Delhi [2.2] so not surprisingly [0.5] er [0.
8] a city like Beijing [0.5] er far more polluted than a city [0.5] like [0.3] 
Sydney [0.5] in terms of sulphur dioxide [0.2] at least [0.4] and in fact when 
you start to look at particulate matter [1.1] and these are particles that will 
have all sorts of deposits [0.2] attached to them [0.6] er [1.0] some will be 
[0.3] er [0.7] cancer causing [1.0] er chemicals et cetera et cetera have all 
sorts of impacts [0.3] on human health [0.5] er lung diseases [0.8] bronchitis 
[1.0] all these sorts of things [0.4] three-hundred-and-thirty-eight days [0.8] 
nearly every day of the year [1.0] er [0.4] over the time this survey was taken 
[0.3] in Beijing and Delhi [0.3] were these particulate matter days [0.2] over 
that critical limit [3.0] and the U-N has worked out then that over six- [0.5] 
hundred-million people [0.4] live in cities where the sulphur dioxide level [0.
2] is having a bad effect on their health [2.5] and one-and-a-quarter-billion 
people [1.0] are in cities with unacceptable particulate matter [2.5] so 
there's a lot of people [0.3] living in [0.6] an environment [1.1] an air 
environment [0.5] that is pretty bad for their health [5.2] 
okay [12.7] so those figures were taken out of the World Resources [0.5] book 
that i showed you last last week [10.6] again as part of our introduction let's 
have a quick look at land [0.2] as a resource [5.4] again obviously land an 
important spatial entity that we use to build on et cetera et cetera [0.3] an 
important medium [0.9] for example for crop growth [1.0] an important source of 
[0.2] other natural resources mineral resources [0.5] and so on [1.2] and again 
[0.6] it's a sink for pollutants [9.7] so in terms of its value to us [1.8] 
what are the important characteristics of land [1.3] what sorts of [0.9] 
characteristics attributes of land are important to us [0.9] any ideas [8.3] 
yeah 
sf0639: it's in fixed supply [1.1] 
nm0638: it's in fixed supply and that's sure that's the economist in you [0.3] 
responding there isn't it [0.5] yeah [0.2] okay it's in fixed supply [0.3] but 
what attributes what characteristics [2.2] mean that land is either very 
valuable to us [0.3] or not very valuable to us [2.5] or very useful to us or 
not very useful to us [1.1] yeah 
sf0640: fertility [0.9] 
nm0638: sorry [0.2] 
sf0640: fertility 
nm0638: yeah [0.2] 
okay fertility level of fertility in the soil [0.5] anything else [0.6] 
sm0641: whether it's flat or kind of steep and slopey
nm0638: yeah [0.2] okay so the topography of of the land yeah [0.6] anything 
else [7.7] 
sm0642: climate and microclimate 
nm0638: yeah okay climate [2.5] so climate topography [0.6] altitude these 
things [1.6] are are linked of course [1.6] er soil you mentioned [0.2] 
anything else [11.3] 
sm0643: its geography to other [0.2] compared to other sources [0.4] 
nm0638: yeah [0.2] okay [0.3] so its location [0.3] is going to be important [0.
6] whether it's located near [0.5] er [1.4] another [0.2] er important natural 
resource like a water resource [0.4] like a river or the sea or whatever for 
instance [1.3] and of course property rights [3.2] important for all resources 
we said [2.4] but particularly [0.2] associated with with land as a resource [4.
5] and again i've just [2.9] picked out a few [0.2] figures [2.4] looking at 
land use across the world [2.2] so looking at [0.2] er [0.3] the percentage of 
crop land pasture land forest [0.7] er [0.5] and wilderness which is quite 
interesting [0.5] throughout the world [1.2] so not surprisingly [0.6] er [1.1] 
Europe [1.4] thirty per cent of Europe is [0.2] down to crops [0.7] eighteen 
per cent to pasture 
thirty-three per cent to forest [0.6] er and only four per cent [1.9] is total 
wilderness [0.4] so nineteen per cent will be [0.5] land that's built on and [0.
3] all other land [0.4] yeah [1.0] including swamp [0.4] desert [0.4] et cetera 
[3.0] so if you compare Europe [2.7] with a country [1.5] well with an area 
rather rather rather a region such as South America [0.9] here we've got 
relatively little [0.3] crop land overall eight per cent [0.5] quite a lot of 
[0.2] pasture [0.2] yeah a lot of range [0.2] management twenty-seven per cent 
[0.6] lot of forest fifty-two per cent we know there's a lot [0.6] important [0.
2] er forest resources in South America [0.5] and [0.3] quite a lot of 
wilderness too twenty-four per cent [1.5] i think the U-N classified wilderness 
[0.4] er [0.7] as an area [0.2] that had no signs of man's activities at all [0.
5] so there's no roads no habitations [0.5] er [1.0] no teleph-, [0.4] 
telecommunications or or anything [0.6] so no no sign of their [0.7] er [0.2] o-
, of man's input at all [4.4] and here's a quite an interesting contrast here 
for the U-S and Canada [0.8] which have [0.3] totally different [0.2] figures 
[2.3] the [0.3] U-S r-, r-, relatively population dense [0.3] 
compared with [0.3] with Canada [0.6] er so Canada [0.2] sixty-five per cent [0.
8] of Canada is classified as total wilderness but of course a lot of those 
areas are very very cold [0.5] areas [2.0] in the far north [4.4] okay so a a 
global idea of [0.2] of land use i thought those figures might be [0.5] useful 
to get things into perspective into context [7.1] and while we're talking about 
forestry [0.8] i just [0.5] dug out a few figures on [0.2] on forestry [0.7] 
that might be interesting [3.1] don't know whether we can see this but i'll [0.
4] talk you through it anyway [5.7] a diagram here just showing the area of 
closed forests cleared annually [0.7] in various tropical countries in the 
nineteen-eighties [0.9] i've got some nineteen-nineties figures to see how 
things have [0.5] changed in the nineteen-nineties [2.4] so closed forests 
where there's a where there's a closed canopy [0.7] over the top [1.8] so you 
can see for instance [0.6] that throughout the nineteen-eighties [0.5] Brazil 
was [0.2] clearing over two per cent [0.3] of its forest closed forest area [0.
2] every year [4.0] yeah so if you carried on at that sort of rate 
then [0.6] you can see [0.6] that fifty or sixty [0.2] years and you've 
virtually cleared the whole lot if you carried on at that rate [0.2] depending 
on replanting of course [0.7] India four-point-one per cent [0.5] every year [0.
5] of closed forest [0.7] Costa Rica here [0.3] seven-point-six per cent of its 
closed forest being cleared [0.2] every year in the nineteen-eighties [1.1] so 
you can see that deforestation was [1.7] maybe still is we'll see [0.5] er a 
real problem [0.3] certainly up until the nineteen-eighties [0.8] so what's 
been done about that since [0.6] well [0.5] these are updated figures sorry 
they're a bit scruffy [7.1] this is for the nineteen-ninety to ninety-five 
period [0.4] when in South America [0.9] well it we only had Brazil before [0.
2] er two-point-two per cent but South America overall [0.5] er losing at just 
[0.3] point-five of [0.2] w-, [0.2] one half of one per cent [0.4] every year 
[0.5] yeah [0.3] zero-point-five per cent [0.5] a year [0.2] Asia [0.2] zero-
point-seven per cent a year [0.2] Central America still [0.3] er relatively [0.
4] er rapid compared with other regions one-point-three per cent a year [0.3] 
but nothing like the 
seven-point-six per cent that it was [0.4] er back in the nineteen-eighties [1.
5] Africa [0.4] point-seven per cent Europe is actually increasing [0.5] its 
forest area [0.2] slightly [0.4] point-three per cent [0.4] so these are total 
figures [0.3] they take account of [0.2] afforestation [0.4] a-, [0.2] as well 
[0.2] so they're not directly comparable [0.5] but certainly [0.4] countries [0.
5] areas of the world [0.2] have taken action [0.5] because y-, you know to try 
and slow down the rate of deforestation [0.9] but at a global level [1.0] yeah 
[0.3] the net effect is still [0.4] that we are losing trees on the planet [0.
3] at a rate of around point-three per cent [0.6] er a year [10.0] we've got 
two other resource types that i want to look at [0.3] er [0.7] sorry three 
other [0.5] fairly briefly [0.5] the next is [0.8] a quick look at mineral 
resources [12.6] and one simple classification of mineral resources [0.5] might 
be into whether they are metallic or non-metallic [3.2] so the metallic 
resources we're talking about [0.3] relatively abundant [0.8] resources such as 
[0.3] iron iron ore [1.2] and of course there are relativis-, [0.3] relatively 
scarce ones 
such as copper [0.6] gold and so on [3.4] on the non-metallic side [1.2] we can 
look at the different uses to which non-metallic resources are put [0.4] so we 
can classify them into for instance [0.2] whether they're used for [0.3] 
chemical uses [0.6] of one sort and another [0.7] given the example of nitrates 
[3.3] whether they're used for building purposes [1.1] clay [0.4] cement [0.4] 
sand [3.1] and of course the important fossil fuels [0.8] that are used to 
produce energy [1.9] like oil [0.2] and coal [11.0] and so we're when we're 
looking at this issue of scarcity [1.7] it's a fairly relative term isn't it [0.
7] and i've got some figures here that i thought were interesting [0.7] and i 
haven't updated them [1.6] because i haven't er managed to get hold of [4.2] 
comparable data [1.2] i wanted to update them to ninety-eight [0.2] and they 
didn't actually produce [0.3] comparable data so i so i couldn't do that [1.0] 
but although this data is over ten years old it still still makes the point [0.
4] it looks at [0.2] sort of major region [1.4] in terms of production and 
consumption [0.6] er [0.2] of iron ore [0.4] major regions in the world [0.2] 
and 
it looks at the world total [1.9] the interesting thing to look at [0.8] are 
these two figures [0.2] the reserves and the reserve base [0.8] and i think 
this is a very [0.2] useful [0.5] way of thinking about [0.2] the scarcity [0.
3] of a resource [0.4] it looks at the life-years [0.6] left [0.2] of the 
resource [0.4] at current rates of consumption [4.6] so of reserves that are at 
the moment [0.3] economically viable [1.3] to actually mine [1.1] in nineteen-
eighty-eight there were a hundred-and-sixty-seven years worth [0.4] of iron ore 
[0.9] left in the world [2.2] but there are other reserves that we know about 
that at the moment or at least in nineteen-eighty-eight [0.2] weren't 
economically viable [1.2] to mine [0.6] and if you included those all known [0.
4] reserves [1.7] then there's over two-hundred years two-hundred-and-thirty-
six years worth [1.2] of iron ore [0.3] in the world [1.3] but it could cost 
you quite a lot to get it [0.3] all of it [4.6] and the smudgy question that i 
had written down here was [0.3] to what extent did these figures take account 
of recycling [1.8] and i didn't find the answer to that i'm afraid [0.2] from 
the U-N 
figures [1.5] clearly if you stepped up your recycling programme [0.5] then [0.
3] er effectively you can reduce your level of consumption [1.0] and er 
increase your your life-years [0.2] from your resource [1.3] so that's iron ore 
relatively abundant [0.4] we've got [0.8] over two-hundred years worth probably 
of known reserves there are probably other reserves that we haven't found yet 
[6.1] 
here's a different [0.2] resource [2.3] again the only figures that you might 
want to take down in your notes are these life-, [0.8] er life-year figures [4.
2] here we can see with z-, with zinc [2.3] a relatively scarce [1.0] metallic 
[0.2] mineral [3.4] total known reserves [0.8] regardless of how much it costs 
us to get the stuff [0.5] out of the ground [0.3] only forty-two years [0.4] in 
nineteen-eighty-eight [1.5] and only half of that [0.4] were actually 
economically viable [0.9] to mine in nineteen-eighty-eight [0.2] just twenty-
one years [1.7] so in terms of relative [0.3] scarcity [0.7] er zinc a 
relatively [0.4] scarce mineral resource [0.4] compared with [0.4] iron ore [0.
9] fairly obviously [2.7] and what i was particularly interested in is finding 
out [0.5] the estimation of this figure today ten years on [1.8] does that 
really mean today that we have [0.4] less than ten years [0.4] worth of 
reserves of zinc left [3.3] if i can find the figure [0.2] i i will [0.6] i'll 
let you know [20.9] just a few other [0.2] quick [0.8] illustrative figures [0.
8] on life-years [1.8] you won't be able to see all this but i will er [0.5] 
point out [0.6] the interesting bit [0.2] looking at fossil fuels [2.1] just 
quickly running through here [0.9] looking at the life-years [0.5] left [3.0] 
again in nineteen-eighty-eight looking at [1.6] current levels then [0.3] of [0.
3] er consumption [1.3] looking at oil [0.9] just ten years worth in North 
America apparently [0.9] over fifty years in Latin America [0.7] Middle East 
they couldn't even estimate it they just put a hundred years plus in the Middle 
East [1.2] lucky old Middle East [8.1] so a relatively scarce resource 
certainly [0.6] for North America [2.1] and Western Europe here [2.0] what 
about natural gas [0.2] again North America fourteen years Western Europe [0.6] 
thirty-four years [0.9] er Middle East again a hundred plus years Africa a 
hundred plus years [0.9] so the world totals at the bottom here [0.3] forty-one 
years worth of [1.3] er reserves of oil [0.7] global oil reserves [1.5] fifty-
eight years worth of natural gas [0.2] apparently [1.1] and when you look at 
coal [1.4] we've got over two-hundred [0.2] years worth of coal reserves in the 
in in the world so coal [0.2] a relatively abundant resource [0.4] compared 
with [0.7] oil and natural gas [5.5] so in Western Europe again we've got over 
two-hundred years worth of [0.7] coal reserves [0.7] Africa's got [0.8] three-
hundred-and-fifty [0.3] years worth [0.5] and so on [0.7] relatively abundant 
[12.6] sorry [5.9] so that was our quick look into into minerals [6.8] let's 
have an even quicker look at water [1.3] as a resource [3.8] and if you haven't 
done this exercise before [1.3] it's quite illuminating [0.9] write down all 
the [0.5] the uses [0.7] all the reasons why water is valuable to us [0.7] all 
the uses for water [1.7] what do we use water for [0.8] and all the reasons why 
it might be valuable to us [7.8] we'll see what we've got in a couple of 
minutes 
nm0638: okay what have we got who wants to start us off [2.8] anyone uses of 
water [2.0] 
sf0644: energy [0.8] 
nm0638: energy 
sf0644: yeah [0.3] 
nm0638: yeah [0.2] okay [2.5] we'll come on to that in a minute [1.4] 
sm0645: drinking [0.5] 
nm0638: yes thank you for stating the obvious one first on my list [0.2] yeah 
okay [0.6] er [1.4] i've called it potable supplies drinking water supplies [0.
5] because of course in in many countries certainly in this country [0.4] we 
use drinking quality 
water [0.3] to do all sorts of things with not just drink [2.1] so we wash 
ourselves in drinking quality water we wash our clothes in drinking quality 
water [0.3] we sprinkle our gardens with drinking quality water in this country 
[1.7] whether that's a good use of potable supplies of water [0.5] i'll leave 
you to [0.3] think about [1.2] okay so potable supplies [3.6] what else [0.8] 
sm0646: non-potable supplies [laughter] [0.3] 
nm0638: which you use for [0.9] 
sm0646: er [0.4] energy [0.6] 
nm0638: yeah we've had that
sm0646: we've already had [0.3] er 
nm0638: yeah [2.5] 
sm0646: for irrigation and [0.7] 
nm0638: okay [0.2] all right irrigation [0.3] anything else we'll come on to 
that it's f-, further down on my list [1.0] 
sm0647: recreation [0.8] 
nm0638: yeah okay recreation boating and all sorts of [0.5] things yeah [0.9] 
sm0648: food source [0.8] 
nm0638: food source [0.5] fisheries 
sm0649: fishing [0.2] 
nm0638: seaweeds all sorts of things yeah [0.8] anything else [6.2] please 
someone the next thing on my list [4.4] what else do we use water for [2.9] we 
drink it [0.5] irrigate [0.8] we produce power [0.7] using it [0.7] 
sm0650: transport [0.3] 
nm0638: yeah [0.3] okay [0.5] good [0.3] it's not the next thing on my list but 
sf0651: sanitation and removal of sewage [0.3] 
nm0638: 
yeah [0.3] okay [2.3] anything else [0.2] well i suppose that is the sort of 
category i was thinking of actually [0.7] various industrial uses [1.3] whole 
load of industrial uses from cooling to [0.6] all sorts of things [5.7] okay 
you mentioned irrigation we've got that hydro-electric power [0.5] er transport 
[1.2] as well as recreation i've included [0.8] er sort of landscape [0.2] 
amenity value [2.2] these things are all linked [4.1] anything else [2.4] we've 
had food production [8.5] anyone got anything else on their list that we 
haven't [0.5] had [2.8] 
sm0652: it's life-sustaining 
nm0638: yeah yeah i think that's quite an important thing 
sm0652: yeah 
nm0638: to put down so it yeah [0.5] it's life-sustaining [0.3] i've got sort 
of habitat and ecological value [0.3] and this smudgy bit [0.2] just talks 
about biological cycles which is your point [2.3] yeah it's a it's crucial to 
biological cycles isn't it [0.8] and it's important for habitat [0.3] 
ecological value [2.0] i know a lot of these things are [0.2] are linked [0.4] 
you mentioned food production [2.0] as well as that of course [0.7] it can be 
an important source of [0.2] 
minerals [5.6] it's an important sink for pollutants [0.8] and linked to the 
biological cycles bit [0.5] of course it's important [0.3] to climate system [2.
0] and that's not an exhaustive list i'm sure you can think of [0.2] of other 
things [2.0] so it's a pretty valuable resource to us isn't it a pretty useful 
resource [9.4] we'll stop for a a quick coffee break in a minute but before we 
do that [3.7] just one area of use here which i thought might be useful to look 
at [0.4] and that's er [0.4] irrigation [1.3] so here we're looking at fresh 
water withdrawals by region [0.4] we're looking at [0.2] figures for the 
nineteen-eighties [0.4] and [0.2] projections for [0.3] this year two-thousand 
[2.4] and [0.2] er [0.2] because the [0.3] the diagram didn't have that i've 
just coloured in [0.2] if you like [0.5] the proportions that are used for 
different uses [1.2] so I-R is the red is irrigation [0.7] I-N is what's used 
for industrial purposes [0.4] and D [0.2] is what's used for domestic [1.0] 
purposes [2.6] so in Europe [0.3] most water is used for industry [0.6] 
followed by irrigation [0.4] followed by domestic purposes [1.8] not 
surprisingly in Asia the vast 
quantity of water is used for irrigation [0.4] with a relatively small amount 
used for industry [0.3] and domestic purposes [3.2] and so on you can see the 
figures for yourself [1.0] what's noticeable [0.6] is that [2.4] over the 
nineteen-eighties to two-thousand [0.7] period [0.8] there [1.3] has been [0.6] 
a pretty [1.1] big increase [0.4] in the amount of [0.2] of water used for [1.
1] these various purposes [2.5] again putting even greater demands on the 
resource base [2.2] yeah remember the diagram we had increasing population [0.
3] increasing economic activity this is these are all [0.3] signs of that [1.0] 
and the stresses and strains that that that places on resource use [0.4] on 
resources [5.8] okay finally just something to think about [0.2] i thought i'd 
get some pollution figures out [1.5] and i i just hit on [0.6] two little [0.5] 
figures as being illustrative [3.2] okay [2.3] sorry [2.4] and again the-, 
these are late nineteen-eighties figures [1.8] er [2.1] this is looking at 
faecal coliform bacteria in the water [0.9] so this is [0.2] looking at the 
levels of these bacteria [2.7] per hundred millilitres of water [2.2] yeah so 
faecal coliform 
bacteria coming from [0.7] faeces [2.9] for instance [2.5] so in the U-K [0.5] 
looking at the River Exe [0.2] which is around [0.6] Exeter [1.6] way [2.3] per 
[0.9] hundred millilitres of water [0.7] there are five-hundred-and-fifty [0.6] 
of these bacteria [0.5] per hundred millilitres of water [0.4] yeah [3.0] but 
if you looked at the Sabarmati [1.1] in India [0.4] and i don't know whether 
that's a system or a river i've no idea what that is [1.5] yeah [0.4] then you 
are looking at [0.5] one-point-seven- [0.3] billion [1.4] of these bacteria [0.
5] per [0.2] hundred millilitres of water [1.8] so that's [0.2] er [0.9] a 
relative [0.2] measure [0.7] of pollution for those two [0.4] s-, [0.2] river 
systems [0.3] which are being used for totally different purposes of course [0.
9] in totally s-, [0.2] different circumstances [2.2] and there's a great 
improvement in this [0.4] river [0.8] in India because it was five-point-four-
billion [0.5] faecal coliform bacteria per hundred millilitres of water [0.4] 
so it's gone to [0.2] er less than half [1.1] about a third [13.0] so all sorts 
of waste will be go-, will be [0.4] being produced [0.9] er [1.8] pumped out 
into this into this river of course [1.0] people will be 
washing in it [0.9] er livestock would be [0.2] drinking and being washed in it 
et cetera et cetera [0.2] all sorts of activities being carried out [2.4] okay 
but not a not a very healthy environment is it to be washing in and so on [1.5] 
now you can imagine the health problems that accrue from that level of 
pollution [3.0] okay thank you that's time for coffee obviously [0.8] er let's 
just break for five minutes please because i do want to [0.5] finish within [0.
4] half an hour or so [1.3] okay so a quick comfort break for five minutes 
nm0638: so that was a quick look at er water resources [14.1] 
let's have a look at [0.3] er [1.9] ecological resources [1.9] what do we mean 
by ecological resources [0.7] here's a little definition [3.1] all plant and 
animal resources in terms of individuals species communities habitats and 
ecosystems [0.7] other than those managed specifically [0.8] for financial gain 
[1.6] a slightly sort of hazy definition [2.1] but in other words commercial 
fish farms wouldn't come into this category [1.8] commercial forest plantations 
wouldn't [0.2] i guess come into this category this time just [0.4] let's start 
with a little bit of [0.2] simple little bit of data [1.2] looking at er [0.6] 
globally threatened animal species [0.7] and i've just chosen three countries 
[0.3] three very different countries [0.5] Brazil the U-K and India [4.9] and 
these are animal species that won't include insects [4.3] so Brazil [0.6] some 
three-thousand species known [2.0] of which the U-N reckoned [0.5] a hundred-
and-five [1.1] were threatened [0.7] and the i think the definition of being 
threatened was [0.3] er [0.2] 
extinction [0.5] er likely within the next ten years unless something was done 
[5.0] the U-K [1.7] relatively speaking not so species [0.2] rich [1.1] for 
these animal species three-hundred-and-thirty-five [0.6] of which sixty-six [0.
2] of them [0.3] were considered to be threatened [1.3] and India again 
relatively species rich over two-thousand [0.7] known species of which [0.4] a 
hundred-and-seventy-eight [3.4] were thought to be threatened [3.0] and i don't 
know what message from from this little bit of data [1.3] er [1.3] sort of 
comes across to you but one of the things that [0.4] comes across to me [0.5] 
is that here we are in in the U-K [0.4] in the developed world [0.4] we're 
always talking about [0.5] er dreadful things happening in other parts of the 
world and the loss of species the loss of rainforest [0.3] and the effect on 
species et cetera in Brazil [0.6] but [0.4] here we are with a relatively high 
proportion [0.3] of our own animal species [0.5] threatened [0.7] by possible 
extinction [0.5] so what that says to me is that maybe we ought to [0.7] look 
at our own backyard and start doing some things in this 
country [0.5] as well [0.7] which we are of course [13.6] okay so why are [0.2] 
ecological resources important to us [0.7] what's their value to us [1.8] why 
are s-, we so worried [0.6] about er species becoming extinct [0.4] habitats 
losing habitats and so on [7.0] any ideas [11.5] perhaps they're not perhaps we 
shouldn't bother [0.3] who cares [0.4] who cares if these species become 
extinct let's not waste resources worrying about them yeah [2.6] 
sm0653: 
nm0638: does it matter if some obscure species in Brazil becomes extinct [0.9] 
sm0654: it's all to do with the natural equilibrium [1.4] 
nm0638: okay [1.4] so we're worried then that [0.2] we may disrupt the 
environment [0.9] so we're very worried about environmental stability and 
sustainability [4.0] the assumption being that [0.6] species rich ecosystems [0.
4] are more stable [1.1] ecosystems [2.1] and if you start to lose species [0.
8] you're disrupting the ecosystem [0.3] which may lead to environmental 
instability of [0.3] one sort or another we're not quite sure [2.3] and anyway 
in the long term it can't be sustainable can it to keep losing species [0.2] 
all the time [2.8] that's the argument [1.2] 
okay why else are these [1.2] ecological resources [0.6] valuable to us [0.2] 
useful to us [4.2] 
sf0655: something might have [0.4] medical value [1.1] 
nm0638: yeah [0.5] okay [0.4] something might have [0.2] er [0.7] medical value 
yeah we'll come on to that [0.3] in a minute [1.7] 
sm0654: part of the food chain [2.6] 
nm0638: y-, part of the food chain in what regard [0.3] 
sm0654: we might not directly eat it but it keeps the nutrients part of the the 
the food chain
nm0638: yeah okay [0.3] okay so it's important [0.6] maybe to fish stocks or [0.
3] whatever yeah [0.3] o-, okay yeah that's [1.1] that's certainly true [0.4] 
anything else [2.0] 
sf0656: maintain like woodlands and grass and [3.0] 
nm0638: yeah is that different from the en-, environmental stability do you 
mean something different than [0.5] just environmental stability is there 
sf0656: no i suppose that's [1.8] 
nm0638: okay [1.9] er [0.6] well maybe it's part of this the direct returns bit 
[0.5] we get all sorts of direct returns don't we [0.7] from [0.2] er [0.4] 
ecological [0.3] resources [5.0] so we pick berries [0.2] we harvest [0.6] 
wildlife for meat and [0.4] yeah so loads of [0.6] different sorts of direct 
returns [1.7] and as well and th-, this is the thing i thought you were getting 
at namex was er [1.8] there's a visual a 
landscape an amenity aspect to many of these resources [0.4] game reserves 
bring in tourists in Kenya or wherever [0.6] er and so on often [0.2] you know 
i-, [0.6] these ecosystems mean that [0.2] there's a nice landscape that we 
enjoy [0.9] and so on [5.0] you talked about [0.2] er advances [0.5] in 
medicine and so on well [0.2] you know these species are an important source of 
genetic [0.3] material they're genetic reserves [0.4] maybe that elusive cure 
for a certain disease is [0.8] er you know [0.5] the secret is locked up in one 
of these species that are threatened [3.0] or maybe there's some genetic 
material that we can use for something else [0.8] who knows i mean these days 
with biotechnology [0.6] er [0.4] who knows what's going to be possible in the 
future [0.4] this is one of our many areas of uncertainty for resource use 
isn't it [0.2] technology [3.7] okay education and [0.7] research [3.4] value 
to us [1.6] and what do you think about this economists [0.6] often talk about 
existence value [1.6] and i question whether it [2.2] itself [0.2] exists [0.4] 
er the idea of existence value that a species has a value to us [1.5] just 
because it exists [0.3] doesn't matter if if it doesn't have any of these [1.1] 
benefits necessarily [0.3] but it's important
sm0657: intrinsic worth [0.4] 
nm0638: exactly has this intrinsic worth [0.5] it's not because it has any [0.
5] real necessarily any tangible benefit to it [1.0] we should keep it because 
it exists and we shouldn't get rid of it [2.7] whether that is really [1.0] 
just because it exists [0.2] or actually whether it's because of [0.5] one or 
more of these things [1.4] yeah the possibility [0.8] you know it's useful as a 
genetic reserve [0.5] er maybe it contributes to environmental stability [0.3] 
that's what i question i think [3.9] i think [0.2] probably what we're saying 
when we talk about existence value [0.3] is that all species have a value to us 
[1.8] because maybe [1.2] it's important for environmental stability [0.2] 
maybe in the future it could add to our direct returns [0.4] maybe it could [0.
3] be important genetic material that we'll use in the future and so on [2.3] 
but you will come across this this term existence value [0.2] in the literature 
[2.0] and i think in in a 
future session you're probably going to talk about it a little bit more with 
with namex [12.4] okay so we've been getting into sort of looking at some data 
and [0.3] considering the more practical aspects if you like [0.5] of [0.3] er 
natural resource use [0.4] and the environment [0.7] er what i want to do now 
is to get back to a little bit of economics [1.6] because one of the things 
that we've nearly that that we've never [0.3] actually got straight [1.5] is 
well what sort of economic framework [0.4] do we need [1.2] in order [0.2] for 
us to er decide on [0.4] the best use of resources [2.3] d-, i didn't give this 
to you last time did i [0.5] no [1.3] it's just a copy of the overhead that i'm 
going to [0.5] put up in the screen [0.8] in a moment and it just saves you 
from having to get it down [5.5] lots of take-aways let's pass them along 
please [21.3] so let me remind you about some very basic economics [1.0] that 
hopefully you haven't forgotten but i [0.4] thought i ought to remind you 
anyway [3.5] so now what we're trying to do is determine the optimum use [1.1] 
of a resource [1.5] and we assume that our aim is to 
maximize the net benefit to society [2.8] now we know that governments and so 
on don't necessarily actually have that aim but let's assume that that's what 
we want to do [0.3] to maximize the net benefit [0.4] to society [0.3] from the 
use of our resource [1.3] so on the Y-axis here [0.4] we have [0.5] the 
benefits and costs [0.5] associated [0.3] with using the resource [0.4] in 
pounds [4.5] on the X-axis we have the amount [0.2] of the resource [3.6] that 
we're using [2.0] so if you look at [0.6] the total [0.2] social benefit curve 
[1.2] yeah [0.2] T-S-B total social benefit [0.4] you can see [0.9] that as we 
use more and more of the resource [0.4] our total social benefit increases and 
increases [0.8] i've assumed diminishing marginal returns [0.3] in that it 
actually starts to tail off [0.6] or diminishing utility [1.3] that may not be 
true it could be a straight line [0.3] doesn't matter [0.2] for this analysis 
[2.9] okay so [0.6] the benefit increases [0.9] as we use more and more of the 
resource [4.3] here we've got the costs [0.2] associated with using the 
resource [0.5] the costs of mining it [1.5] using it to produce whatever we we 
want from the resource energy from fossil fuels whatever [0.8] and so here we 
have [0.3] what i've called the total private cost so it's the cost to to 
industry [1.0] of [1.1] using the resource [0.5] and here you can see again [0.
4] we've got increasing [0.6] costs [0.7] we we're assuming diminishing 
marginal returns increasing costs [0.5] per unit [0.2] of resource [0.2] are 
assumed [3.7] so the greatest benefit [0.8] the greatest net benefit that we 
can achieve [1.5] is the biggest difference isn't it between [0.7] total social 
benefits [0.5] and total social costs [0.9] yeah that's the biggest net benefit 
[1.6] so at this level here that is the optimum level [0.4] of our resource [1.
9] that's the level at which we maximize the net benefit [0.4] to society [1.4] 
and if it was a private firm that we were talking about [0.6] yeah that would 
be the profit maximizing position wouldn't it [2.1] and of course the profit 
maximizing position [0.4] is where [0.4] marginal costs [3.7] equal marginal 
benefit [0.5] yeah so they're just the [0.3] marginal curves [1.0] straight 
lines in fact [0.2] that go with these [0.5] total curves [1.2] so here we have 
[0.3] marginal social benefit curve [1.3] yeah which is declining [2.0] like a 
demand curve [1.7] and here we have the marginal private cost curve [1.1] 
like a supply curve [4.2] and here's our optimum level [0.4] of resource and 
i've got here for example barrels of oil [0.5] so at level Q that level of use 
of oil [1.4] is where we maximize you can see here the net benefit to society 
[1.1] and if we wanted to bring that allocation about [0.8] the market would do 
it for us if it was a perfect market [0.6] it would price [0.4] these barrels 
of oil at P [0.2] each [1.6] yeah [0.6] and that would be [0.4] er a perfect 
allocation of resources [2.7] maximize net benefit to society great [0.3] easy 
[5.2] the problem is as we said [0.5] is that our simple economic framework [1.
0] has in the past [0.5] failed to take account of things like environmental 
pollution [2.3] these we said we consider as externalities [0.7] to the 
production system [1.7] so what happens if we [1.5] try to take account of 
these [1.6] externalities [8.4] what we're saying then [1.3] is that our 
private cost curve [0.9] the costs of getting that oil out of the ground [0.4] 
and the costs of [1.1] 
getting it into a form where we can burn it in our cars and get energy [0.2] 
for instance [1.6] is actually not the true cost of using that resource [2.2] 
because for instance [1.8] our cars pollute the atmosphere [1.4] and [0.2] an 
external [0.6] cost [0.5] is borne by third parties [0.4] maybe you or i 
walking along [0.2] inhaling fumes and our health suffers [1.9] or maybe global 
warming [0.4] whatever [1.8] so there's an external cost [0.8] that falls on 
other people in society [2.0] than the oil companies [0.3] and just the people 
that drive their cars there are other people that [0.5] bear the costs [0.2] as 
well [1.4] so these external costs then [0.2] have to be taken into account [0.
3] in order to get the total social cost [0.4] of resource use [0.3] rather 
than just the private cost [2.0] so this green curve suitably green [0.8] curve 
here [3.0] has taken account of the negative externalities like environmental 
pollution [0.4] associated with using the resource [0.9] and you can see the 
cost curve [0.6] has shifted upwards [7.5] now if we use this cost curve [0.3] 
instead of the private cost curve [0.2] to look at the optimum use of our 
resource [0.6] you can see that the optimum [0.5] changes [1.1] and net benefit 
to society from using the resource [0.3] is actually achieved at a lower level 
[0.2] of resource use here [1.0] than previously [2.5] and if we look at the 
marginal [0.3] cost and marginal benefit curves [0.7] we can see that [0.9] 
perhaps even more clearly [4.9] so now we have the marginal [0.2] social cost 
curve [1.6] added [0.7] to this diagram same diagram as before [0.2] we've just 
added [1.1] this green marginal social cost curve [2.7] yeah which is the slope 
isn't it these marginal curves [0.2] are the slope the rate of change [0.4] of 
these total curves yeah [0.8] so that's the slope [0.5] of this curve [3.2] 
yeah so you can see that the slope is [1.1] increasing and hence this marginal 
social cost curve [0.7] is increasing [3.2] so [0.3] the optimum use of our 
resource that was at Q [0.8] now that we've taken account of the negative 
environmental externalities [0.3] associated with the use of this resource [0.
4] our optimum [0.2] is actually not at Q [0.7] yeah we've been using too much 
of this resource [0.2] it's actually [0.4] here [1.0] at Q-dashed [0.2] in 
green [4.9] so in 
order [0.3] this diagram is telling us in order [0.3] to maximize the net 
benefit to society [0.3] we need to cut back [0.5] on current usage of oil [0.
3] and use a little bit less of it [4.1] and again that point is shown [0.9] by 
[0.2] where the marginal social cost curve [0.9] cuts the marginal social 
benefit curve [4.6] the other thing this diagram tells you [0.8] is that where 
the price of oil [0.2] before [0.6] was price P [1.1] if you want to bring 
about [1.9] this [0.2] environmentally-friendly [0.4] maximum [0.3] benefit to 
society [0.7] you've got to change the price of oil [1.1] and the price that'll 
bring about this level of resource use [0.5] again is where [0.7] the marginal 
curves [0.3] cross [0.3] which this time now is P-dashed [0.9] so this is 
telling you if you want to bring about [0.6] this allocation of resources 
within society [0.3] you're going to have to increase the price of oil [0.4] to 
consumers [0.4] from P [0.4] to 
P-dashed [2.1] because the market won't do that [0.3] the market will set the 
price at P [2.3] so one of the things [0.2] for instance that you might want to 
do [0.2] is to place an environmental tax [0.5] on oil [0.4] so that the price 
people pay isn't P [0.3] but it's P-dashed [2.1] and that's is one of the 
things that namex is going to talk to you about [0.9] er in future weeks [5.7] 
are there any questions about that diagram i i think it's fairly simple and 
straightforward [0.4] you should have seen diagrams like this before [1.9] but 
are there any questions [2.1] because it's important that y-, that you 
understand it at this simplistic stage [0.3] before you do any further theory 
[8.4] okay [0.3] i can see you're totally exhausted from the experience of 
doing a bit more economic theory [0.5] so i think let's call it a day shall we 
[1.0] okay and next week [0.4] will be will be namex 
