nf0368: okay so today you've got two lectures off me [0.8] er the first one 
we're going to start and look at renal function [0.6] and consider the concept 
of clearance as i've put it there [0.4] the first bit's a bit of a reminder [0.
2] er to [0.5] remind you what the composition of body fluids [0.3] are you 
should know this this is A-level stuff if not degree [0.9] then we're going to 
move on to how we regulate our body volume [0.5] and then [0.2] the last half 
of the lecture's looking at the kidney's function in terms of filtration [0.5] 
clearance and i'm afraid the calculations that we can do [0.4] er [0.3] from 
these er [0.2] parameters [1.3] so if we look at an average man [0.2] seventy 
kilograms [0.4] and you can see [0.4] a lot of hi-, a lot of us is water forty-
two per cent roughly [0.5] sorry sixty per cent forty-two litres [0.3] is water 
that's a huge amount of water [0.4] and we have to regulate that very carefully 
[1.1] females we have slightly less [0.9] the reason for that is as you on your 
sheet is [0.2] er adipose tissue [0.6] we have more [0.3] and fat has less 
water in it so females actually less water [0.4] 
proportionally than men [0.9] and if you're very very lean you don't have as 
much at all [0.4] and these are things to take into account obviously a very 
fat person [0.3] compared to a very very thin person may have a slightly 
different water balance [1.1] so this is just to remind you [0.3] in an average 
situation here you are you've got a blood vessel a capillary [0.9] you've got 
the endothelium through which things can move [0.4] and then you've got the 
tissue that it butts up against [0.5] and you've got all these different 
compartments of er fluid you've got interstitial [0.3] you've got within the 
cells [0.3] er [0.3] you've got endothelial cells obviously have your and red 
blood cells in the plasma [1.1] so if we then take those er different 
compartments [0.3] and look at them er [0.8] in more detail [0.7] so again your 
average seventy kilogram man [0.6] and you can see here intracellular fluid is 
sixty per cent and extracellular's forty so it's not quite fifty-fifty but it's 
of that sort of proportion [0.7] and that's then further subdivided [0.3] into 
these 
er proportions so [0.3] the majority of your intracellular fluid comes from 
cells around the body [0.4] but the red blood cells although they're in a fluid 
environment don't forget they're cells and have some water [0.4] within them 
themselves [0.4] and then your plasma and interstitial fluid splits [0.5] er [0.
3] into these proportions [1.4] now that's basically that should be er quick 
revision for you [0.3] and don't get tied up in learning too many of those 
numbers just remember the basic principles it's [0.3] roughly fifty-fifty [0.5] 
er [0.7] tissue to water in a human and roughly fifty-fifty extracellular to 
intracellular [1.3] and then if we look at the composition of the fluids now 
this is where it becomes more important where the kidney has a greater role to 
play because obviously [0.3] it regulates your ion concentration as well as 
your fluid [0.6] and you can see here the osmolarity [0.4] between the 
intracellular and extracellular [0.3] is the same [0.4] it should be the same 
and it's very important that they stay almost identical [0.7] and we'll come to 
that in the next slide or two [1.0] but if we look at the [0.3] ionic 
composition between the er [0.2] two [0.6] er set-ups the ones coming in you'll 
need handouts that are at the back [1.4] you can see here [0.3] that they're 
composed of positive and negative ions [0.4] and the important foin-, [0.3] 
points are [0.4] the ones that are in the biggest proportion so if you look 
here they're different between extracellular and intracellular [0.5] here 
you've got sodium and chloride [0.7] i think i've actually circled these for 
you [0.5] er as your extracellular your main cation and main anion [0.5] and in 
the intracellular it's potassium and phosphate [0.8] so these are the four that 
are really important to remember which one's the important anion and cation [0.
3] intracellularly [0.2] and extracellularly [0.8] and if we move on to the 
next slide [0.4] this is more important than anything and we come on to this i 
think it's about session six but don't hold me to that [0.4] when we look at 
potassium balance [0.5] potassium [0.2] wants to be inside the cell [0.4] 
sodium wants to be outside the cell [0.2] 
and it's extremely important particularly that the potassium remains within the 
cell [0.4] so if the only thing you remember from the last couple of slides is 
that potassium is inside [0.3] and sodium's outside [0.4] that'll be [0.4] er 
okay [2.1] and why i said the [0.3] osmolarity was important between the 
extracellular and intracellular [0.3] you all know about osmosis and if you 
don't go and remind yourself about osmosis [0.5] but as you can see here [0.4] 
if the osmolarities were not the same between the intracellular and 
extracellular fluid [0.3] the cell is either going to swell [0.3] or it's going 
to shrink [0.3] either way you don't want that to happen in your body so you 
need to maintain the similar osmolarities that the cells maintain their normal 
structure [0.4] represented by this pink blob here [0.2] purple blob [1.5] okay 
so that's a very quick refresher of things i hope you all know and if you don't 
know you're perfectly capable of just reading the handouts [0.9] let's move on 
to fluid balance [1.2] and obviously fluid balance is what the 
kidney's all about [0.7] so here's your total body [0.2] er water [0.3] about 
forty-two litres [0.9] and in a day this is what we should take in an average 
person [0.8] food [0.4] obviously is [0.2] self-explanatory the water that 
comes from metabolism it's a breakdown product of lots of er metabolic 
reactions so you produce about four-hundred mls of water a day [0.7] hopefully 
[0.3] most of you are drinking about fifteen-hundred mls of water [0.4] if you 
drink less than that you should up your intake and anything up to about [0.4] 
two three litres is fine [0.2] basically the more you drink as long you don't 
drink in excess the better for your kidneys so [0.5] that's er [0.4] something 
you should be advocating for your self and any of your patients as well but 
certainly fifteen-hundred [0.3] would be a normal intake and [0.2] most people 
would suggest a thousand to fifteen would be your absolute minimum [1.3] so 
what do we excrete each day or get rid of [0.5] you lose a lot through your 
lungs now if you haven't covered this on respiratory i'm sure you're going to 
but you breathe out a lot of water vapour during the day [0.6] we sweat [0.5] 
we lose some in faeces but you can see it's only a small amount fifteen-hund er 
a hundred millilitres [0.5] and then you lose some in urine [0.8] and this 
figure here [0.3] is the only one that's variable [0.7] obviously [0.4] if you 
have something you go on a marathon you're going to sweat more than normal [0.
6] and if you drink er if you have diarrhoea you're going to lose more fluid er 
through your faeces than normal [0.5] but if you don't do anything abnormal [0.
4] then within reason your lungs and your skin and what you lose through faeces 
[0.3] these are relatively fixed volumes [0.5] so the only way you've got to 
regulate your fluid volume [0.3] is via your urine [0.5] and if you actually do 
the sums if you add up these [0.3] you'll see that [0.2] the er five-hundred 
and the [0.2] four-hundred there equates to this [0.4] so basically [0.3] your 
urine constitutes [0.2] what you drink [0.3] is what you get rid of in your 
urine [0.2] as a very rough guide [0.2] obviously [0.2] there are variables [1.
8] now [0.5] you have to 
actually [0.2] pass four-hundred mls of urine day [0.4] anything less than four-
hundred mls [0.4] and your kidneys begin to fail because they come into 
problems [0.3] they're not passing enough fluid [0.3] you're not actually 
getting rid of enough urine to be able to clear your body of all the metabolic 
waste products that you want to get rid of [0.6] so [0.5] you have to here as 
an absolute bare minimum is four-hundred [0.6] so if people aren't taking in 
four-hundred mls of fluid and remember i've put drinking there [0.3] but if 
it's a patient it may be an I-V drip [0.5] if they're not getting four-hundred 
mls in [0.6] then their kidneys are going to begin to suffer [0.3] and you're 
going to have problems in terms of kidney failure and toxic build-up of waste 
[0.4] so that's a really important er fact to remember [1.6] so when we look at 
fluid balance [0.2] obviously that's what we hope [0.3] what you take in equals 
what you give out [0.6] but it doesn't always happen [0.7] so if you have [0.3] 
if you're dehydrated it's hypovolaemia [0.7] or hydr-, or fluid overload we 
call 
hypervolaemia [0.9] and remember the kidney is the only organ that regulates 
your fluid [1.7] so what are the symptoms [0.6] these are in books they come up 
later when we look at blood pressure control so don't get too tied up with the 
symptoms and the causes and the treatments at this stage [0.6] but basically 
they're fairly self-explanatory [0.6] if you're dehydrated or hypovolaemic [0.
4] you're usually thirsty [0.8] your blood pressure will be low [0.4] er [0.5] 
because [0.3] you have too little fluid volume circulating to maintain a normal 
blood volume [0.4] so if you stand up you might be dizzy [0.5] and confusion's 
a sign so they're quite nebulous [0.5] and [0.4] quite often happens in old 
people so you can see it's quite difficult old people do get confused and dizzy 
at the best of times so [0.4] er it's always difficult to tease out the er 
specific symptoms [0.3] but bear that in mind elderly people [0.4] get 
dehydrated very quickly [1.1] and signs that you might be looking for as a 
clinician [0.4] er [0.5] are things like i mentioned the blood pressure so 
they're going to 
have postural hypotension [0.5] er they're going to have a low J-V-P [0.5] 
weight loss [0.3] if it's gone on for a while they begin to lose weight i mean 
everybody well [0.3] a lot of the women will know one of the best ways to lose 
weight if you're anorexic or something is to take a diuretic and you'll lose a 
load of fluid quickly [0.4] so you might see weight loss [0.4] their mouth will 
be dry when you look in it [0.5] and then they're going to have er [0.2] very 
dry skin that's not elastic [0.3] and obviously their urine output's going to 
be less than normal [0.7] and conversely hypervolaemia is almost the opposite 
[0.5] they get breathless because the lungs get congested with fluid [0.5] and 
their ankles may swell from oedema [0.6] now we don't actually cover oedema as 
a subject [0.3] er but again it's something you should know about [0.6] and 
they're going to have the opposite here basically so they may put on weight [0.
3] their blood pressure will go up so they'll be hypertensive [0.5] and then er 
this goes to the fluid in the lungs you may be able to hear 
crackling in the lungs [0.5] so that's the sort of things to look out for if 
you think somebody's got too much or too little fluid [1.3] so how does the 
nephron control your fluid balance then [1.2] so there's three main processes 
and these are the ones we're going to look at today [0.8] you've got filtration 
[0.2] we touched on this a little bit last week with glomerular structure but 
we're going to cover it a bit more today [0.8] and the main aim of this is to 
sieve the plas-, the blood you want to sieve the blood [0.3] so that you end up 
with er [0.8] a protein-free plasma effectively all the plasma goes into the 
filtrate but not the proteins [1.9] the nephron then has two very important 
functions [0.6] one i-, is cun-, [0.2] er secretion [0.3] so it can secrete 
things into the er glomerular filtrate [0.2] which will become urine [0.5] so 
er has a role in P-H regulation [0.4] and particularly here [0.3] if you've got 
er foreign substances or drug metabolites you want to get rid of [0.3] they may 
be secreted into the nephron [0.8] and tubular reabsorption [0.7] so [0.2] we 
filter if you 
remember last week i was telling you that we filter the whole of our blood 
volume every five minutes [0.4] and that accounts for a hundred-and-eighty 
litres a day [0.7] now a hundred-and-eighty litres a day obviously we can't go 
on losing that amount of water you have to reabsorb it and most of what you 
filter through th-, your kidneys [0.3] is reabsorbed and that goes for 
everything on the whole [0.4] unless it's a toxic substance you want to get rid 
of [0.5] so everything so things like [0.3] er most of the sodium you filter [0.
3] is reabsorbed you're only getting rid of half a per cent of the sodium that 
gets filtered in a day [0.6] you get rid of more urea and that becomes 
important later in the course [0.7] you reabsorb all your glucose you shouldn't 
have any glucose in your urine [0.3] if you do that stri-, er will indicate 
diabetes mellitus [0.7] and ninety-nine per cent of the water so you're only 
getting rid of er out of every hundred ml you filter you only pass one ml of 
urine [0.8] and these two [0.3] very much go together you'll see the 
secretion and reabsorption occur in similar regions of the nephron [0.4] and 
sometimes they're actually linked together [0.7] er [0.4] not going to go into 
detail of those today because they come up in each separate bit of the module 
[0.3] as we go along [0.3] but [0.2] it's important you remember that you filst-
, have to filter it [0.4] then you have the option of secreting or reabsorbing 
substances and those three things together [0.4] are the crux of fluid er [0.6] 
balance [0.4] and the control of ions and electrolytes [0.7] and then of course 
finally [0.4] don't forget you got your urinary excretion [0.6] and it's really 
important that you begin to get used to talking about [0.4] secretion [0.3] or 
excretion because the two are different depending on what you're talking about 
[0.3] the excreted things are the things that in the urine that actually get 
removed from the body [0.5] secreted things [0.4] are items that go from the 
blood [0.3] into the kidney er tubule [2.3] so what exactly do i mean so here 
we have a schematic [0.4] so this is your nephron that's your 
er Bowman's capsule and your glomerular tuft [0.7] and here you've got and [0.
4] the artery goes in you've got your afferent arteriole [0.3] efferent 
arteriole and it comes down into the peritubular network of blood vessels [1.1] 
and you've got these three substances blue ones pink ones and green ones [0.6] 
so they all come into the glomerular tuft together [1.5] and then you'll find 
the blue and the green ones [0.2] are filtered into the tubule so they're 
actually into the nephron lumen now [1.2] but they don't behave the same then 
[0.6] we actually want to keep the blue ones or keep the majority of the blue 
ones [0.3] so you'll find they're actually reabsorbed [0.3] back from the 
tubule into the circulation [1.8] likewise the pink ones [0.4] don't get 
filtered at all they go round they miss the er glomerular filtration er region 
[0.5] into the peritubular circulation [0.3] and then these get secreted [0.2] 
into the nephron [0.8] so the upshot of that in this very simplistic model [0.
4] is that the [0.2] pink ones and the green ones get excreted [0.3] whereas 
the blue ones are 
mostly if not completely reabsorbed into the blood system [0.5] so that's the 
three [0.8] main procedures [1.2] so i said i'd talk about the glomerulus a bit 
more this week and how it actually does this filtration [0.5] do you remember 
this picture from last week's lecture [0.5] here's your capillary [0.6] the 
endothelium with the capillary with er holes in it remember it's fenestrated [0.
9] then you've got the er basement membrane here [0.4] and you got the 
epithelial cells which are the podocytes which are these specialized kidney 
cells [1.2] and between them they allow things to move across [1.2] now the 
filtration obviously occurs on the size and the shape [0.5] because these holes 
[0.2] are a physical barrier the fenestrations and the slits between the er 
podocytes [0.4] so if you're too big you won't get across [0.4] but the shape's 
important as well if you're flexible and can squash up as a molecule [0.3] you 
may be theoretically too big but you may be able to squash up [0.3] and fit 
through one of these slits or holes [0.8] and the charge is important [0.2] the 
podocytes and the basement membrane are negative [0.3] and proteins tend to be 
negative [0.3] so that will stop help to stop proteins crossing across the 
glomerular [0.4] er membranes [0.3] because the negatives will repel each other 
[2.7] having said that it's the podocytes that form the really restrictive 
layer [0.7] the fenestrations here [0.3] are bigger [0.3] than the slits 
between the podocytes [0.6] so this is a rough guide as to what's going to 
happen [0.3] now these numbers will [0.2] alter as i've just said depending on 
the shape and the charge of the er molecule that wants to be filtered or not [0.
6] but roughly anything less than seven kilodaltons is going to come across 
with no barriers whatsoever [0.5] then you've got a grey area up to seventy 
kilodaltons where generally [0.3] it's permeable to those [0.3] and molecules 
less than that size in weight will generally get across [0.4] and anything 
above seventy [0.4] usually won't [0.2] and that includes all the proteins so 
most proteins [0.3] are above seventy [0.3] or if they're not they have the 
negative charge which 
will encourage them not to come across [2.3] but the filtration [0.4] actually 
depends on pressure because th-, [0.2] it's acting like a sieve if you imagine 
now the glomerular structure's like a sieve with the holes in [0.7] but you 
need the pressure to force things across and we're going to look at that [0.4] 
er [0.2] exactly how that works in the next couple of slides [0.5] but in order 
to help it it's got two things [0.5] one the capillary walls are a hundred 
times more permeable [0.3] than other capillaries throughout the body [0.9] and 
as we'll see later [0.3] they've got a greater pressure the er [0.8] er the 
pressure of blood within the arterioles in the glomerular tuft is greater so 
they're more permeable [0.4] and the blood is at a higher pressure [0.3] and 
those two factors together [0.3] force the fluid through the glomerulus [0.4] 
and into the kidney er [0.2] nephron [1.6] so okay so this is er a recap of 
what i've said basically [0.6] you've got pressure from the artery [0.8] and 
you've got this movement of fluid now there's two other things to take account 
of here [0.6] 
it's not a simple pressure thing [0.4] remember you have fluid in the 
glomerulus [0.3] and you have fluid within the Bowman's capsule and the kidney 
nephron [1.0] and the [0.2] both of those will exert an hydrostatic pressure [1.
5] so the the [0.3] fluid that is already within the nephron [0.3] will push in 
one direction [0.5] the fluid that's within the [0.2] capillaries [0.3] will 
push in another direction or the interstitial fluid will push in another 
direction [0.5] you have blood pressure to take account of [0.6] and you also 
have these er oncotic pressures [0.6] now you should have covered these and er 
Starling's forces in lots of detail i believe in the cardiac [0.2] 
cardiovascular module which was last semester [0.6] er but if you can't 
remember just [0.2] remind yourself briefly of what they are [0.4] but this is 
due to proteins [0.4] proteins themselves [0.4] er will cause fluid to want to 
move from one place to another [0.3] and that's known as oncotic the pressure 
due to the protein [0.5] er is oncotic pressure [0.9] so if we move this into a 
glomerulus and see what that actually looks 
like here [1.3] as you can see [0.4] this is your glomerular going with your 
blood flow coming in and out [0.3] so you've got your blood pressure [0.2] 
represented here by [0.2] these er [0.2] numbers [0.3] so you've got your blood 
pressure [0.2] into your [0.2] er [0.7] kidney tubule [1.3] you have the 
hydrostatic pressure [0.4] exerted here by the fluid that's already in the 
tubule [0.4] pushing back [2.2] and then you've got the oncotic pressure from 
the plasma proteins [0.7] er [0.4] there are lots of proteins in here [0.5] and 
there are no proteins unless something's wrong in here [0.4] so if we move on 
to the [0.3] there is a calculation here i've put it down for you don't worry 
you won't be asked to exaplain that or write it down [0.4] but remember [0.5] 
that you've got blood pressure one way [0.2] hydrostatic pressure the other way 
[0.3] and oncotic pressure the other way [0.6] and the oncotic pressure works 
like this [0.4] in the tubule [0.3] you have very little protein two to five 
nanograms per ml [0.4] but in the plasma you've got six to eight [0.4] grams [0.
4] so that's a huge huge th-, er [0.3] variation in the amount of 
protein [0.4] and what that means is that the water in order to equal out the 
protein concentrations [0.3] the water tries to move from the kidney tubule [0.
4] into the plasma [0.4] and that will exert a pressure [0.3] because obviously 
it doesn't go back that way naturally [0.6] so when you put these together [0.
9] you actually find if you add these sums up you can see the numbers are there 
[0.3] you've only got a ten millime-, [0.2] er millimetres of mercury pressure 
[0.4] forcing stuff [0.4] into the tubule [0.3] that's not very much that's 
quite a low pressure [0.6] but remember i said that the [0.5] capillaries are 
more permeable than normal [0.3] and remember the glomerular structure's like a 
ball of wool so you've got an awful lot of capillaries [0.3] within the 
glomerulus [0.4] that er [0.2] large surface area [0.3] actually causes you to 
be able to filter a lot of er [0.2] blood [0.3] within a small space of time [0.
3] as i've already said it's a hundred-and-eighty litres a day [1.7] okay so we 
come on to the [0.4] glomerular filtration rate [0.7] and that's the rate that 
you are able to filter blood [0.4] and 
produce a glomerular filtrate [0.5] quite [0.5] reasonably self-explanatory [1.
5] now in a male [0.2] it's about a hundred-and-fifty mls per minute [0.6] and 
you see i've written it up here it's a hundred-and-fifty mls per minute [0.6] 
and that's the surface area of a man [0.7] an average man [0.7] now most people 
will talk about [0.2] er G-F-Rs [0.3] as just like mls per minute [0.2] most of 
the nephrologists will most normal clinicians will [0.4] but it's important to 
remember its correct units have a surface area attached to them [0.5] and this 
becomes im-, [0.3] particularly important when you look at neonates [0.4] and 
old people because obviously their surface area if you're very small are very 
sma-, [0.3] er sm-, small [0.2] old frail lady or small baby [0.4] becomes 
important [0.4] so you need to remember it's per surface area and you will lose 
marks if i ask for a G-F-R and you give me [0.2] mls per minute [0.3] and not 
mls per minute per surface area so it's [0.4] if you can't remember it's one-
point-seven-three [0.3] an average man [0.3] you it's all right if you put per 
surface area 
i'll let you off on that one [0.4] but it is important to remember that's its 
correct units [0.6] and again it's a bit less in females [0.3] and it decreases 
with age as you get older [3.5] okay now your G-F-R actually remains constant 
your blood pressure goes up and down dur-, out the day goes up and down 
depending on what you're doing [0.5] but your G-F-R [0.9] tries to remain as 
constant as possible [1.1] and it does this be-, [0.2] by dilating the arteries 
if you remember you have an arteriole in and out [0.4] and there are ways of 
controlling [0.4] er both the efferent and the afferent arterioles [0.5] and 
that's how it regulates blood pressure [1.4] or or adapts to blood pressure 
rather [0.5] so if we have a look here if your blood pressure increased [0.5] 
you've got more pressure in the glomerular tuft [0.3] in theory [0.4] which 
would force more fluid through [0.5] er into the tubules and increase your G-F-
R [0.7] that would be what you would expect to happen [0.5] but it doesn't 
happen because this is what happens here this is a normal 
glomerulus say you've got [0.4] in and out arterioles at roughly equal er [0.2] 
sizes [0.4] and that's your normal [0.2] blood flow and normal pressure [1.0] 
if your blood pressure goes up [0.4] a series of mechanisms come into play [0.
4] which actually constrict the afferent arteriole [0.5] which restricts the 
amount of blood that flows into the glomerular tuft [0.4] if you restrict the 
blood [0.3] that effectively compensates for the increased blood pressure [0.3] 
and so you maintain the amount of force that's provided by the blood [0.5] er 
as the same [0.7] likewise it works in reverse if your B-P [0.3] drops [0.4] 
you would expect if there's less pressure your g-, er G-F-R's going to drop [0.
7] now that's seriously we don't want that to happen because there are reas-, 
times when your blood pressure drops [0.4] and you don't want your kidneys to 
stop working because if your G-F-R [0.4] drops to almost nothing [0.5] and you 
stop making urine your kidneys fail quite quickly [0.3] and although it might 
not be er a failure forever it's a serious medical condition so the body 
doesn't 
want that to happen [0.3] so it wants to keep the pressure within the 
glomerulus [0.2] high so that filtration goes on as normal [0.4] so it does the 
opposite there [0.5] and this time it dilates the afferent arteriole [0.5] and 
er you get far more blood flow going through into the glomerulus [0.3] and that 
compensates for the change in pressure keeps the pressure up [0.3] and the G-F-
R stays the same [1.0] so generally throughout the day whatever happens to our 
blood pressure our G-F-R's going to be constant [1.7] er [0.9] that's what i 
said [0.7] er [0.6] this is just to remind you this isn't anything i expect you 
to know yet some of these things will come up as we go through the module [0.5] 
but there are drugs that regulate er [0.3] blood pressure [0.3] or er arteriole 
constriction or dilatation [0.6] don't worry about what they are yet they're 
listed here simply 'cause i took it out of a book [0.3] some of these will be 
pointed out to you as the course goes through [0.5] but if certain drugs alter 
your arteriole pressure in your glomerulus [0.4] either by constricting or 
dilating [0.2] 
the efferent or the ef-, afferent arterioles [0.3] that will affect G-F-R [0.2] 
and may affect kidney function so you just need to bear that in mind [0.8] [1.
3] so what happens if you've got clinical conditions your G-F-R stays constant 
normally but obviously there's times when that doesn't work [1.4] so if you 
have an obstruction [0.5] somewhere within the er urinary system [0.4] that 
causes the pressure of the fluid within the tubule to build up [0.6] the 
hydrostatic pressure then backs up [0.5] and causes a greater force of pressure 
[0.3] from within the tubule [0.2] out through the glomerulus [0.3] preventing 
filtration occurring [0.3] so in that case your G-F-R will drop [0.7] so 
somebody who has a blockage a build-up of fluid [0.5] will their G-F-R drops [0.
9] again obviously changes in the glomerulus are an important er factor to bear 
in mind [0.5] so [0.2] if your glomerulus [0.2] blocks up effectively your G-F-
R will drop [0.3] your urine output will drop and er you have kidney problems 
[0.3] but likewise if there's damage that causes it to leak [0.4] then y-, er 
[0.2] 
fluid's going to flood through your glomerulus [0.4] and you're going to have 
an increased G-F-R and an increased urine output [0.4] now those are usually 
reasonably obvious to spot either because something's in the [0.4] urine that 
shouldn't be there because it's got across the glomerulus [0.3] or your urine 
output goes up or down accordingly [0.4] er [0.4] and then you have to start to 
investigate why [1.5] but i just want to put down here that a very small change 
in kidney function they're they're hugely adaptive we're only using a small 
percentage of their [0.5] er ability [0.4] er you know 'cause er people with 
only one kidney either because they've lost one through illness or er [0.5] 
they've had a transplant you only get one when you have a transplant [0.3] they 
function perfectly well they don't have to restrict their diet or anything 
particularly [0.4] to compensate for having lost half of their renal function 
effectively [0.7] but a small change can have a problem [0.3] or or can [0.8] 
er manifest itself as something obvious [0.4] so here we've got [0.4] two 
G-F-Rs the same [0.5] and you would normally produce one ml of er [0.2] urine 
per minute that's what's our normal production [0.7] but you can see if you 
start producing two mls of urine per minute that's actually [0.3] a small 
amount here so you're only altering your reabsorption by one ml and your 
excretion by one ml [0.4] but that's actually doubling your urine output [0.3] 
so although per minute that doesn't seem much you take that into account over a 
day [0.3] that's a huge volume change 
nf0368: so moving on now to renal clearance [0.5] and that's simply the ability 
of your kidneys to clear [0.4] whatever you're talking about [0.3] from the 
blood [1.6] and it's an actual quantity and again it's got units it's [0.7] per 
ml of plasma per time and you'll see why in a minute [0.5] and it's completely 
independent [0.4] of the amount of urine you produce [0.5] so if you clear ten 
milligrams of something [0.3] per minute [0.7] it's going to be ten milligrams 
per minute whether you're peeing [0.3] one litre in an hour [0.3] or two litres 
in an hour obviously it's more dilute [0.4] in the urine [0.3] 
but what you clear from the blood stays the same [1.0] is that clear [1.0] so 
the urine [1.0] concentration has nothing to do with your renal clearance [0.4] 
that's a b-, er that relates to the amount you clear from the plasma or the 
blood [2.2] now [0.4] obviously there are times when we want to calculate how 
effectively the kidneys are working [0.7] the times when we want to know what 
the glomerular filtration rate is [0.3] there are times when we want to know 
what the renal blood flow [0.4] er [0.2] is [0.3] and we can calculate that as 
well and we'll come on to that [0.3] towards the end [0.5] but the G-F-R's a 
really useful one to calculate [0.2] if you have glomerular diseases [0.3] 
you're going to notice a change in the G-F-R so it's something that clinicians 
do regularly [0.9] so in order to calculate that if something is cleared [0.4] 
er [0.3] from the blood by filtration alone [0.7] then [0.2] the rate that it's 
its renal clearance equals the glomerular filtration rate [0.7] so if it's c-, 
er [0.2] purely filtered [0.7] the rate at which it's filtered [0.3] is the 
rate it's cleared from the 
blood [1.0] okay [1.0] so [0.3] how do we calculate this [1.3] and one thing 
i've put up here it's important to remember [0.6] that this is [0.3] comes in 
remember i said remember to get excretion and secretion the right way round [0.
5] also remember to [0.3] start getting in the habit of using urine [0.3] and 
filtrate in the right [0.6] er context [0.9] urine is only urine [laughter] 
urine is only urine [0.3] once the filtrate enters the collecting system [0.3] 
until it enters the collecting tubules [0.2] anything before that is 
technically known as filtrate [0.9] er so when i'm talking about stuff that's 
within the glomerular [0.4] neph-, er the nephrons rather [0.2] that's always 
filtrate until it enters the collecting system [1.0] so if something is purely 
filtered [0.4] not reabsorbed into the bloodstream [0.4] the concentration in 
the filtrate is exactly the same as the concentration in the plasma [1.1] so in 
order to measure it we need something that's freely filtered you don't want any 
kind of barrier to its filtration across the glomerulus [0.9] we don't want 
anything that's er absorbed or 
secreted [0.6] and we don't want it to be made or metabolized by the kidneys [0.
7] and that's actually quite a limiting er selection of finding things to do 
like that [0.7] so we have inulin [0.5] which is the ideal it's the gold 
standard if you really really have to know very accurately the G-F-R you have 
to use inulin [0.6] but it's infused and it's not easy to measure in a lab so 
it's not an ideal it's not an easy test to do [0.7] but creatinine [0.8] is 
easy [0.5] that's a br-, a natural breakdown subject er sub-, [0.2] er [0.3] 
substance [0.4] we've got here it's freely filtered [0.4] it's not reabsorbed 
so that fulfills all the criterias [0.8] we do have a little bit of secretion 
of it [0.7] that's not a huge problem and i'll explain why on the next couple 
of slides [0.3] but you have to bear that in mind we do secrete a small amount 
of creatinine [0.3] so it's not an ideal substance but it's the best we've got 
[0.8] so how do you calculate it [0.2] so i'm sorry you've got all these 
calculations but i've written them all out for you and if you have any trouble 
catch me in 
the group work [0.4] afterwards but i'll take you through them now [0.6] so 
here are our G-F-R [0.4] you know i've put mls per minute i haven't bothered 
with the surface area there 'cause [0.2] the calculation's easier [0.6] er to 
explain that way [0.5] this is the volume of er urine so you have to measure 
how much urine you're producing over a certain time [0.6] and work out the rate 
per minute [0.9] this is the creatinine concentration [0.4] in the urine [0.6] 
so just want that as a concentration [0.5] and this is the plasma concentration 
[0.3] so you want to compare how much is in the urine [0.4] to how much is in 
the plasma basically [1.1] and that will give you the rate at which it's being 
filtered and you can see the units cal-, [0.4] these units c-, er cancel out so 
you're left with mls per minute [1.2] and that er calculation here [0.5] this 
i've got down to determine G-F-R [0.4] but you can replace that with renal 
clearance [0.3] this calculatio-, or this equation [0.3] will calculate the 
renal clearance of anything [0.5] you can look at how much is in the urine [0.
3] versus how much is in the 
blood [0.5] now or plasma we're using this for creatinine [0.3] so that equates 
to G-F-R but if it was a different substance that wasn't completely cleared [0.
3] then it would be the renal clearance number [0.5] so just r-, [0.2] bear 
that in mind [0.7] so is it a good estimate remember i said that some of it was 
secreted as well [1.6] it's not a big problem [0.6] the assay that measures er 
plasma creatinine [0.2] overestimates [0.8] so the two of them [0.3] cancel 
each other out the bit of secretion that comes from the body [0.3] versus the 
overestimation of the plasma creatinine [0.3] tend to cancel each other out [0.
4] er so it's not a huge problem [2.0] however [0.5] it can become a problem 
when you have a er [0.5] an illness [0.8] so if the er [1.1] if the G-F-R drops 
[0.4] you get more secreted by the kidneys to try and keep the blood level [0.
4] equal [0.8] the idea is [0.3] er you have the ability to secrete so that if 
for some reason [0.3] your filtration isn't working very well [0.3] you don't 
want the creatinine to build up in your blood [0.4] so the the body says oh 
that's doesn't matter [0.3] if it's 
not being filtered that's fine i'll send it a bit further round the er tubular 
[0.3] capillary network [0.2] and secrete it directly into the tubules [0.7] 
obviously if your secretion goes up [0.4] then when i said that secretion and 
overestimation of plasma cancel each other out that doesn't occur any more [0.
5] so if you have somebody that you know has glomerular filtration problems [0.
5] then creatinine is not a good estimate of G-F-R [1.8] the other problem [0.
4] i haven't actually er [0.3] got the graph with me here but it's in nearly 
every textbook [0.7] in order for you to see a change [0.4] er in plasma 
creatinine levels because of this ability to secrete [0.4] your G-F-R has to 
drop by about fifty per cent [0.8] so if you're simply measure-, [0.3] er 
plasma creatinine [0.3] and you'll find this comes back week after week in the 
group work you get [0.3] urea and electrolytes and creatinine [0.5] the 
creatinines will go up eventually but because of your ability se-, to secrete 
it [0.4] they will only go up when you've lost half of your G-F-R capacity or 
theresabouts [0.8] so if you simply look at plasma creatinine levels [0.4] er 
they could be masking an underlying kidney condition so you just have to bear 
[0.4] because the creatinine's normal [0.3] it doesn't necessarily rule out 
some problem with the er [0.5] kidneys [0.4] although it is used routinely [0.
5] but that does mean the moment you see the plasma creatinine to go up [0.3] 
you know you've got a real problem with your kidneys [1.6] this is another 
thing to bear in mind it depends on muscle mass it's a breakdown of [0.2] 
muscle mass [0.3] little old ladies [0.3] Asian people they have a completely 
different muscle mass from the average white person [0.3] and you have to bear 
that in mind their creatinines may be different as a consequence [1.8] ah i've 
said that already [1.1] i'm not going to [0.3] discuss this now [0.7] this 
table looks at [0.3] er whether something is filtered or reabsorbed or secreted 
or a combination of which [0.4] and gives you [0.6] er examples here tells you 
what happens to the substance examples here [0.5] and then what you would see 
in the renal vein [0.4] 
versus the renal artery is the concentration going to be higher or lower or the 
same [0.7] and ha-, what sort of renal clearance you would expect in comparison 
to a G-F-R [0.8] now what i want you to do is have a look at this and make 
certain for each of those [0.3] you can work out [0.3] why when i said this one 
isn't filtered [0.4] er it's going to be the same in the artery versus the 
brain and er [0.2] [laugh] [0.4] artery versus the vein rather and have no 
renal clearance [0.3] and do that for all of them [0.4] if you can't work out 
[0.6] why that table's as it is [0.4] just come and see me in the group work 
i'm kind of floating around in the group work and we'll go through it [0.3] 
'cause it is important that you understand [0.4] er secretion absorption and 
filtration and excretion [0.4] and i'll happily excuse me i'll happily go over 
that [0.2] later on this morning [1.3] so i said i wanted to calculate renal 
blood flow occasionally [0.3] [1.0] and this is the rate at which the blood 
flows through the kidneys pretty obvious how much goes in versus how much comes 
out [0.6] [1.3] now in order to do this we actually use er [0.8] a function of 
the kidneys [0.5] when the blood flows into the glomerulus [0.3] not all of it 
is filtered obviously you have a flatbed of er [0.9] er endothelium [0.2] 
basement membrane and epithelium [0.2] and you have blood flow over the top [0.
7] now not all of that blood flowing over the top [0.4] is going to be in 
contact with the capillaries and is going to be able to be filtered through [0.
6] the the blood in the centre of the capilla-, of the arteriole [0.3] is 
basically going to go whizzing past over the top of the meshwork of er [0.2] 
sieving apparatus [0.5] so only the [0.2] a proportion of the blood [0.3] is 
actually filtered at any one time [0.6] and i'll show you [0.4] on almost the 
last slide what it is but roughly that works out to [0.2] eighty per cent goes 
whizzing straight past into the peritubular circulation [0.3] and twenty per 
cent is filtered into the [0.4] er nephron [0.4] and that's known as the 
filtration fraction [1.8] now we can use this the consequences are if you look 
at e-, urea [0.6] fifty per cent er [0.8] of urea 
well the urea's filtered but then some of it is reabsorbed so [0.3] you can see 
that some goes through the kidneys [0.4] and some er is reabsorbed [0.6] but as 
it's not secreted back into the kidneys [0.6] only the proportion that actually 
gets filtered can ever get cleared in one time [0.9] so the only way you have 
of clearing urea is to filter it though the glomerulus [0.6] so if only twenty 
per cent of your blood is going into the glomeru-, through the glomerulus into 
the tubule network [0.5] you need five passes of blood to clear it of uri-, 
urea effectively [0.4] okay [1.5] however [0.2] some substances if they're 
filtered and secreted [0.6] or just completely secreted on their own [0.6] you 
only need a single pass [0.6] so if the substance is filtered through the 
glomerulus into the tubule network [0.7] twenty per cent of it will get 
filtered the other eighty per cent of it goes round into the peritubular 
circulation [0.8] that eighty per cent that's escaped the first pass into the 
peritubular circulation [0.3] will then be secreted directly into 
the tubules [0.7] so the whole hundred per cent of that particular substance [0.
3] gets into the nephron [0.4] in one [0.6] go of the blood [0.4] through the 
nephron circulation [1.2] does that [0.5] make sense [0.5] okay [0.6] and we 
can use that to work out the renal blood flow [0.7] and one substance that [0.
3] does this is P-A-H [1.6] okay so here we have [0.3] green blobs going into 
the glomerulus [0.3] some [0.6] gets filtered [0.2] some goes into the 
circulation [0.8] but as it comes into the circulation when it gets to the 
correct part of the nephron [0.3] it's secreted into the tubule [0.5] the 
consequences are [0.4] you have P-A-H coming in [0.6] P-A-H going out in urine 
[0.5] but hardly any at all in the renal vein [1.8] and we use this [0.4] so we 
calculate in this case renal clearance [0.4] which was i told you just the 
amount that's er filtered [0.4] effectively [0.6] equals the G-F-R [0.3] of P-A-
H [0.5] plus the amount secreted and equals what we call the renal plasma flow 
[2.0] so you calculate the renal clearance of P-A-H [0.4] exactly the same way 
as we used creatinine to calculate G-F-R [0.7] so if you want to work out the 
calculation here 
you've got the volume of urine [0.6] the urine concentration of P-A-H [0.4] the 
plasma concentration of P-A-H [0.3] and that gives you the renal clearance of P-
A-H [0.4] which equals the renal plasma flow [1.1] okay [2.5] however [0.3] you 
want to work out the blood flow blood flow's not just plasma it's got red blood 
cells so you need to know what the haematocrit is 
nf0368: we've calculated [0.4] the er [1.0] er clearance rate from the plasma 
[0.5] to con-, er to turn that into blood you need to just allow for the er 
number of red blood cells [0.3] so if you do a haematocrit [0.4] if you find 
that say forty-five per cent's red blood cells [0.5] er and fifty-five per cent 
is plasma [0.4] the renal clearance of P-A-H [0.5] is fifty-five per cent [0.4] 
of what the er renal blood flow is [0.2] so all you simply do to your simple 
calculation [0.5] is you take your [0.5] er renal clearance of P-A-H which is 
about six-hundred mls per minute [1.0] and you multiply that you just do 
correction factor to allow for fifty-five per cent [0.7] so in this case using 
those numbers your renal blood flow [0.3] is just over a litre [0.2] per 
minute [0.6] okay [0.7] you're not going to be used asked to calculate all of 
these in exams or anything so don't worry [2.2] so remember i said we use the 
filtration fraction the fact that only twenty per cent of the er [0.9] blood 
gets filtered at only one time [0.6] you can backtrack that i told you it was 
twenty per cent but you can actually calculate it as well [0.7] so if you take 
your [0.2] glomerular filtration rate [0.7] and compare that [0.4] with your 
renal plasma flow [0.8] that will tell you how much of the blood was filtered 
the first time round [0.8] so if we put our numbers in [0.6] that's your 
standard G-F-R [0.6] i've just told you the renal clearance for P-A-H is six-
hundred and if you do that calculation it comes out to twenty-point-eight a 
little bit more but er [0.9] so that's very simple so you can actually work out 
[0.4] the fractions [0.3] and sometimes [0.3] these sort of inf-, these numbers 
are useful [0.3] if you're trying to work out what your glomerular function [0.
3] actually is [2.0] okay [0.2] we've said that [0.6] [0.7] so if we look at 
secretion and 
absorption now [1.0] now this is what i was saying last wi-, week you have to 
remind yourself of active passive transport [0.4] er simple diffusion 
cotransporters et cetera [0.6] er [0.3] they are all going to crop up [0.2] in 
the later sessions of this module [0.7] er but this is just to remind you that 
basically things go through cells [0.3] or between them [0.3] and they might 
need energy and they might not [0.2] but the one thing you have to remember in 
the kidney [0.4] is that it's arranged like this [0.5] so here you have [0.4] 
this is the nephron with the er filtrate in it and cells either side [0.5] 
[cough] excuse me [0.9] this is your capillary [0.6] er [0.4] and obviously 
that is semipermeable and you have your interstitial fluid [1.1] now things may 
go between the cells in either direction [0.5] and just diffuse simply between 
the cells [0.2] that's quite simple [0.2] [0.5] however if an active transport 
is needed [0.5] you need to have some mechanism to get it into your tubular 
cell [1.0] and you need [0.2] another transport mechanism [0.3] to get it out 
[0.5] and then obviously 
it can simply diffuse into the blood if that's where it's going [0.5] but it's 
really important to remember [0.4] when we're talking about whether things are 
secreted [0.3] or reabsorbed in the kidney [0.3] they have to go from the [0.3] 
either from the [0.3] er [0.8] lumen of the nephron the filtrate [0.4] into a 
tubular cell [0.3] across the cell [0.3] and out the other side so you have 
transport mechanisms on both sides [0.4] and likewise if they're going [0.3] 
into the tubule [0.4] er lumen you have again [0.5] out of the blood into 
interstitial fluid and then you've got two [0.5] membranes it has to get across 
[0.6] and you have to remember that [1.6] so okay so these are the things i 
want you to [0.3] go home with and hopefully remembered [0.5] we've got these 
four processes occurring [0.3] and remember as mentioned get your secretion and 
excretion right [0.4] i mean it's difficult to say i mean even i'm not 
foolproof i you'll find i 
sometimes talk about the wrong one or i talk about urine when i mean filtrate i 
mean i-, it does happen [0.4] and again just remember [0.3] whether you're 
talking about filtrate or urine [0.8] and then these are the things that we can 
calculate G-F-R is the number that you're most [0.3] often going to come across 
[0.6] but using [0.2] the er [0.4] mechanisms of calculating the G-F-R you can 
calculate these other things as well [1.8] and then next week we're going to 
talk about er [0.7] blood pressure control [0.3] in more detail and look at 
sodium mechan-, well i'm not talking about it next week er [0.3] somebody from 
namex is [0.4] but we'll pick up and take it further down and look at the 
regulation of sodium [1.4] so [0.3] i've overrun a little bit [0.5] er we need 
to just move on [0.5] reasonably swiftly to the next one so that namex can come 
in [0.6] er but i just have to sort this out a minute [1.2] so you've got a 
couple of minutes while i swap files over on here
