nm0240: i've lectured [0.3] to you lot [0.2] most of you [0.2] welcome namex 
welcome namex [1.0] er [1.2] about [0.8] real ecology [1.6] now [0.4] it may 
come as a surprise to a lot of you that there are a lot of other real ecologies 
[1.3] it is my belief that there are a lot of other real ecologies [0.4] all 
over the place [1.3] but they happen not to be on this planet [0.3] but on 
other planets other aqueous planets [0.3] around in the galaxy 
nm0240: i don't think it's important [0.6] that you should know about these [0.
4] because i think it highly unlikely [1.2] as my [0.8] slide three from the 
end will say [0.5] that we're actually going to meet them or recognize them if 
they are actually here [1.2] but i think it's a very good biological exercise 
and an exercise for your [0.6] er understanding of [0.7] this ecology [0.5] to 
see it in a broader context and see what else might have happened [0.9] i [1.0] 
professionally [0.3] design ecologies [0.3] for science fiction authors [1.1] 
and [0.8] i have to des-, i have to invent credible ones [0.8] and credible 
means running by rules that everyone can see [2.0] want to 
come round [0.3] 'cause you know [0.5] you can't see the slides 
sm0242: no i'm fine 
nm0240: you're fine [0.2] yeah [0.8] er [1.8] this is a history of life on 
Earth [0.6] four-and-a-half-thousand-million years ago [0.4] the Earth was 
formed [0.4] very soon after its formation as you now know [1.4] life appeared 
[0.3] which suggests that life is pretty easy to make [0.5] well [3.0] fine [0.
9] we ought to be able to know what pretty easy means [0.7] and [0.3] to that 
purpose we use some mathematics now i'm delighted that as a reproductive 
biologist [0.4] i find that mathematics is just as sexy as being in the Biology 
department [1.0] but [0.8] i want to [1.4] talk [0.4] just for a moment [0.3] 
about ways of thinking [1.2] Chip Delany science fiction author wrote a book 
called Empire Star [0.2] in the nineteen-seventies [0.5] and in this he 
invented [1.3] a way of thinking about thinking [0.4] that [0.3] namex and i 
like [0.5] and this [0.2] is from [0.4] the Collapse of Chaos book [2.1] he 
says simplex thinking [0.5] is what most people do most of the time [0.3] if 
you say 
to someone [0.2] what's the most important thing about [0.9] such and such [0.
4] and they answer you [0.4] they're a simplex thinker [2.0] if you say [1.3] 
hang on Alec [0.3] what's [0.3] the most important thing in your life and he 
says [0.3] just a minute there isn't a most important thing it depends where i 
am [0.3] sometimes it's this and sometimes it's that [1.7] and [1.1] you have 
several axes on which you can go and you can find interesting things off those 
[2.2] and most of you i'm pleased to say because we've been [0.2] trying very 
hard to make you do this are complex thinkers [0.7] but few of you are 
multiplex thinkers and a multiplex thinker according to [0.8] Chip Delany is 
someone [0.2] who not only takes into account what is [0.3] and the different 
[0.4] axes [0.3] but also what could be the whole range of possibilities [0.4] 
around what is [1.4] and i suspect i'll be doing a lot of talking with you 
individually about this [0.4] but i'm talking about the fa-, space of 
possibilities around what actually happens [0.8] if you go to an historian an 
American historian [0.2] and you 
say tell me about Abraham Lincoln and what happened in the theatre [0.5] and he 
says [0.6] the bullet the calibre of the bullet was so and so the the assassin 
was called such and such [0.3] this is what happened [1.2] that's simplex [1.5] 
if he says but the same time there were twelve other [0.4] people trying to [0.
4] assassinate [0.6] him [0.4] and the security arrangements had been bunked up 
and the theatre had this [0.3] you think okay that's pretty complex [0.9] but 
if he then goes on to say [0.4] but if Abraham lin-, if it had not been Abraham 
Lincoln who had been elected [0.6] but somebody else [0.3] this would have 
happened [0.5] if Abraham Lincoln had not been shot [0.3] then this [0.2] is 
what i think would have happened to American history [1.2] that's a bit of 
multiplex thinking [2.2] i'm going to suggest to you [0.4] that what we are 
talking about here [0.7] is [0.2] multiplex thinking about ecology [1.3] and 
it's difficult [0.2] and enormous fun as so many difficult things are [0.6] now 
don't pretend to understand everything about biology and you don't need to [0.
7] when namex and i went 
to Neufch√¢tel we saw [0.2] in the [0.3] museum there [0.2] this which i 
thought was a myth [0.7] the roi des rats [0.9] the king of the rats you've 
heard about it in in your [0.3] er [0.8] fairy stories [0.8] rats found with 
all their tails tied together [1.8] sometimes three [0.3] sometimes fifty [1.3] 
most of them starving some of them having been eaten by others [0.6] now 
whether this is a peculiar cult that does this has been and has been doing it 
[0.2] since nineteen-twen since er [0.2] sixteen-twenty [1.0] i have no idea [0.
6] but it is a terribly puzzling thing [0.2] and i have no idea [0.3] where to 
begin to ask questions about it [0.4] so a lot of things that really happened 
that [0.3] i don't have any [0.6] i can't put it in any context at all [1.6] 
that's called science [0.4] you have [0.6] contexts of ways of working [0.9] 
and you know what to exclude [1.7] that's a frog [0.6] at the bottom of a seven-
four-seven [0.6] and [0.8] for me exemplifies ambition [2.6] [laughter] even 
though there's lots i don't know about [0.3] i'm nevertheless going to try and 
take on [0.2] 
what are other ecologies like even though i don't understand our ecology [2.2] 
because i have one trick [0.2] and the trick i invented back in the sixties [0.
2] and it seemed very persuasive to people and it goes like this [0.9] here 
again is the history of our planet [1.5] oldest rocks about four-and-a-half-
thousand-million years ago and they've got life traces in [1.4] i'm going to 
suggest to you therefore that [0.4] because of [0.2] our changed minds about 
chemistry [0.3] life is downhill to chemistry [0.6] and if you like i'll show 
you a B-Z reaction but i'm not going to do it now [0.3] you've seen it before 
haven't you the the [0.8] this [0.4] self-complicating chemical reaction 
invented by Belousov and Zhabotinsky [0.4] and refined and made robust by 
Winfree and me [0.2] have you seen it have i shown it to you [0.7] now i should 
have brought it down but it there isn't time in this lecture [0.2] we'll do it 
[0.7] perhaps i'll come down before lunch and and show it to you [1.2] er [0.3] 
it is [1.6] n-, unlike all the chemistry you did at school all the 
chemistry you did at school had to finish in two hours [0.7] yes [1.2] God is 
not limited like that [0.3] and nearly all of the chemistry that God does [0.2] 
like ozone layers and clays [0.3] takes millions of years and is very recursive 
[0.7] it it is autocatalytic [0.5] even something as simple as reacting 
hydrogen and oxygen together [0.2] requires [0.3] autocatalysis [0.5] unless 
there's some water there it doesn't work [0.8] and there are twenty-seven 
molecules on the way [0.3] from H [0.2] and O [0.2] to water [0.2] things like 
H-thirteen-three-O [0.6] and lots of missing electrons [0.4] it's a very very 
complicated recursive reaction [0.3] even something that appears so simple [1.
2] and the living recursive reactions [0.3] are [0.4] it seems quite easy to 
get going the last three issues of nature [0.3] have had [0.3] big steps on the 
way [2.1] what i want to talk about however is something different [0.6] i want 
to say that [0.4] many [0.2] different [0.3] creatures [0.2] prokaryotes at 
this time [0.4] invented photosynthesis [0.3] now you know that three-quarters 
of the history of our planet [0.6] has been [0.6] prokaryote [0.3] eukaryotes 
[0.2] with nuclei [0.2] 
only appeared [0.2] about a thousand-million years ago [1.4] and [1.0] that's 
to say if you say an Earth-like planet to a science fiction author [0.3] what 
you're talking about is a planet with almost no life on the land [0.2] just a 
few seaweeds [0.5] er [0.8] no not much oxygen in the atmosphere [1.6] take the 
point [0.8] for three-quarters of its life Earth has been like that [3.7] and 
[0.2] only in the last [0.4] six-hundred-million years or so has there been 
this great efflorescence [0.7] of [1.1] the er er has Earth been polluted by 
life [2.0] [laughter] now bear in mind this biggest [0.5] distinction [0.5] 
these are my cheek cells [0.2] and on them are bacteria [0.6] these are the 
nuclei [0.2] of the cheek cells [0.5] there is a contrast for you between [1.0] 
a prokaryote [0.5] a reasonable-sized proka-, a reasonable-sized eukaryote [2.
5] that [1.0] thing that happened [0.4] about [0.3] a thousand-mill no probably 
longer two-thousand-million years ago [0.4] the getting together of several 
prokaryotes into a symbiosis [1.5] didn't happen only once [0.3] 
actinomycetes are another go [0.3] several protozoa like giardia [0.2] are 
other attempts to do this [0.6] it isn't something that happened only once [0.
3] photosynthesis isn't something that happened only once [0.4] therefore and 
this is the argument [0.9] if you ran evolution again on this planet you'd get 
photosynthesis [2.3] you'd get [0.2] life because it's downhill to chemistry [0.
7] that's one kind of argument [0.5] but having got [0.5] chemical systems with 
the properties of living systems [0.7] you will then get photosynthesis because 
[0.4] there have been at least twelve attempts there are twelve attempts still 
with us [0.9] never mind how many [0.3] were [3.1] oh great [2.6] were tried 
and failed er sorry i can't go backwards on this machine [3.3] now [0.2] we 
have a picture of an ecology [0.8] and i want to [0.3] take you away from 
having [0.2] this kind of picture the picture of [0.2] man managing it of all 
the organisms [0.4] being so beautifully together [0.4] i'm not talking about 
that [0.4] i'm talking about the real 
ecology as it is [0.3] systems which rely on [0.3] eating each other's babies 
[1.9] we're talking the real nasty world here [1.2] and in the real nasty world 
[0.3] there are lots of attempts at photos-, photosynthesis [0.4] there are 
lots of attempts [0.2] at many of the things that have happened during [0.2] 
our [0.4] evolution [1.2] er [2.1] we don't have to worry [0.7] about the [0.2] 
origin of life i think and i can argue this with you separately it's an hour's 
lecture by itself [0.9] [laughter] the whole idea of it being a miracle [0.4] 
is in the past because of reactions like this one the B-Z reaction [0.7] you 
shake it up but it does it again you shake it up it have you not seen this [0.
8] oh well i'll bring it down after the talk [0.3] and [0.2] namex can film it 
as well [0.7] er [3.4] now one of the things that's been invented a lot of 
times [0.5] is sex [1.9] [laughter] this is God saying to [0.8] Noah [0.3] 
never mind the other amoeba [0.2] and you know why don't you because [0.6] 
amoeba porn [0.3] flicks only have one actor [2.1] [laughter] yes [1.0] er 
[laugh] [1.3] er [1.4] sex 
has been invented many independent times the ascomycete fungi the red algae 
have all got [0.2] odd variations [0.8] it seems to be very important and we 
don't understand why [0.2] i think in general [0.3] the argument for sex [0.6] 
despite Graham [0.5] Bell [0.9] has not been well argued [3.2] but it's 
happened a lot of times [0.2] another thing that has happened a lot of times is 
that creatures [0.9] eukaryotes have become multicellular [0.2] there's an 
example with volvox [0.6] but there are other examples [0.5] er [0.4] the the 
multicellular seaweeds [0.3] the [0.3] animals [0.2] are all different attempts 
at going multicellular [0.8] so [0.2] and this is the argument [0.4] the 
default is that if i ran the system again [0.3] you would get oxygen in the 
atmosphere because something will invent photosynthesis [1.3] you would get [0.
4] eukaryotes [0.2] because [1.2] the symbiosis is driven by the presence of 
oxygen [0.4] people try and cuddle up to mitochondria which are using a lot of 
oxygen [0.6] because it's er a much more comfortable place than [0.2] where 
there aren't any mitochondria [0.3] and where 
there's a lot of oxygen in the water [1.2] and cuddling up to mitochondria 
you're very soon in-, having a [0.7] eukaryote cell [1.9] that will happen [0.
5] again if you ran evolution again on this planet [0.3] therefore [0.4] here's 
the jump [0.4] on other aqueous planets it's going to happen [1.7] i hope you 
[0.4] take that argument [0.3] something that happens many times here [0.2] i 
call a universal [1.2] universal meaning [0.3] wherever [0.7] life starts that 
is on every aqueous planet [1.6] you're going to get photosynthesis [0.2] 
flight [1.2] well what i call the four Fs [0.3] photosynthesis sorry about that 
[0.4] flight [0.5] fur [0.2] fur on plants fur on bumblebees fur on mammals [0.
5] and mating [2.6] [laughter] right [3.9] now [1.9] before the Burgess Shale 
[0.3] some seven- [0.8] thou-, seven-hundred-million years ago [0.3] there were 
a lot of [0.2] Ediacarian [0.4] Ediacaran [0.3] creatures [0.4] do you know 
about this [0.5] people told you about the history of life no perhaps not [0.4] 
which [0.8] probably have resulted in today's coelenterates [0.2] lots and lots 
of [0.2] two layered 
creatures [2.3] whether [1.4] [laughter] they're [0.3] two layered and they're 
easy to make and it's the easiest way to go multicellular [0.5] if you're a [0.
2] i don't know [0.2] i don't know i think it's just simply that these are easy 
[2.9] but [0.5] i have some nice hydra i don't have any upstairs because they'd 
die in the atmosphere of this place i brought some from home [0.5] i've taken 
some over to the film people [0.7] we've got some lovely ones the same ones as 
these [1.1] but they die in this place these are hydra [0.4] some of you will 
have seen them around the place they're really rather pretty [0.4] they are [0.
2] probably [0.3] a simple animal to make [0.3] and that general pattern [0.2] 
has appeared several times [2.9] now i want to take about the Burgess Shale [0.
7] i hope you all know about Burgess Shale [0.8] i hope you know that [0.3] six-
hundred-million years ago or thereabouts [0.5] many many body forms different 
body forms were tried [1.2] and i'm going to go through them in a moment [0.6] 
it isn't that we have a tree of 
life [0.4] that branches [1.5] it's that we have lots and lots of little bushes 
[0.2] and lots of grass [1.2] things start [0.2] and you they don't continue 
into the future [0.8] and here are some of the things that didn't continue into 
the future from there [0.7] from there [1.3] tail fins Amiskwia [1.8] lots of 
[0.3] goo-, well preserved soft-bodied creatures [0.2] some hard-bodied 
creatures [0.5] Marrella [0.3] it probably [0.7] a very odd trilobite [0.6] and 
we had other trilobites for a long time but we don't have any now [1.0] 
Nectocaris [0.7] with a looking like an arthropod in front and a chordate with 
the tail fin at the back [1.0] lots of body plans tried out [2.3] there's a 
beast Anomalocaris [1.0] few of them survive to now [3.9] a polychaete [0.5] 
Canadia [1.8] and that's one that we do have [0.3] representative of now [0.3] 
Hallucinogenia you probably know as a fairly ordinary trilobite but they got it 
the wrong way up [0.3] because when you find a fossil it 
doesn't say this way up on it [1.2] [laughter] often [2.8] and this [0.4] 
Pikaia the world's fir-, [0.5] first known chordate [1.1] okay that's a thing 
rather like amphioxus [1.8] Branchiostoma which some of you may know amphioxus 
Branchiostoma [0.5] but [1.7] you should ask yourself the question what would 
have happened [0.5] if Anomalocaris had lived [0.2] and this thing had been 
killed because they were equally well [0.9] designed presumably [0.9] and these 
worlds with i be talking to you now with a pair of tentacles in front like this 
and all of you [0.3] sitting there writing with [0.7] tentacles you know [0.8] 
[laughter] yes and we wouldn't notice any difference [0.2] and i could have i 
would be saying as Anomalocaris [0.3] i wonder what would have happened if that 
funny little thing with the [0.2] myotomes [0.3] had lived instead of us [0.9] 
okay [0.2] think about insteads [0.5] complex thinking [3.9] now [0.5] also 
realize that very nearly all of what we know is lies to children [1.1] people 
explained the rainbow to you by saying well you see 
raindrops are like [0.4] er [1.3] prisms [0.6] and that [0.4] but raindrops 
aren't like prisms they're spheres [1.5] and [0.2] when two people are looking 
at [1.5] rainbows we've talked about rainbows before they're looking at 
different rainbows [1.7] realize that most of what you know about evolution has 
that status it's lies to children [1.7] i realized that most strongly when i 
was [0.4] in [0.4] Australia [1.0] and [0.7] in a a [1.1] rainforest [0.3] a 
temperate rainforest [0.7] now you know i'm very full of [0.2] how many sperms 
two-hundred-million at a time how many cod eggs forty-million in her life only 
two of them [0.6] survive to breed [1.1] under a tree [0.2] i found this [1.0] 
which is [0.4] i didn't know what they were for about they're stick insect eggs 
[2.0] now it so happens that all stick insect eggs pretty near [0.6] look like 
seeds [2.3] look there it look at that [0.3] absolutely like a little bean 
isn't it [1.4] or snails [0.3] there's something here look like s-, look at 
that [0.8] little snails [0.6] that look at that one [2.5] now what advantage 
can it be to the creature to l-, to 
have [0.4] eggs that look like seeds or little snails [2.1] and at that time 
and and [0.5] till two years ago i think it's the case that people genuinely 
didn't know [0.4] they didn't know why stick insect eggs took so long to 
develop [0.2] they take about six months so only a few of them get to stick 
insects [1.1] er [0.8] all of them [0.8] not just the one not just the Indian 
stick insect the [0.2] the parthenogenic one [0.5] these are all sexual forms 
[0.4] and [0.3] their eggs take six months to develop [1.0] and until people 
were [1.1] walking about after there had been the big fires [0.3] two-and-a-
half years ago in Australia [0.8] they didn't realize [0.5] what this was all 
about [1.4] when the trees started to the the fire had burned everything above 
ground [1.1] er [0.3] what was happening the trees [0.3] seemed to be a-, had 
deep roots [0.3] and they'd put up little green shoots [0.5] and these little 
green shoots were all covered in baby stick insects [0.9] people said gosh 
what's happened there [1.3] and they found out where the stick insect eggs were 
[0.2] and where they were coming from [0.3] they were coming from ants' nests 
[1.5] because ants bury and store [0.7] 
seeds and little snails [2.4] now the stick insect didn't know that it didn't 
think i'm going to get the ants to do this for me [0.3] but it turned out that 
ones that the ants could [0.2] mistake for seeds or snails [0.3] got and then 
if they ate the odd stick insect egg it didn't matter did it it was the tree 
that was paying for it [3.7] all right [1.1] now that's a bit of [0.4] ecology 
which [0.3] i was completely ignorant about for a long time [0.7] therefore it 
says to me i'm ignorant about most of [0.4] adaptation of ecology on this 
planet [0.8] nevertheless [0.3] i can talk about things on other planets [0.6] 
because [0.5] i can [0.2] make a distinction [0.2] i've talked to you about 
universals [0.8] now i'm going to talk to you about the things that have 
happened in our evolutionary story which are the opposite of that [0.4] 
parochials [0.5] P-A-R- [0.2] O-C-H- [0.2] I-A-L [0.3] only in this parish [0.
2] only local [0.9] things that are [1.9] simply [0.8] here [0.8] once only [0.
4] and won't happen again [0.5] and the classic one [2.3] is this fish that 
came out of the water [1.8] whose descendants were 
the reptiles the amphibians the birds and the mammals [1.4] all of whom cough 
[1.8] because this [0.4] fish [0.3] is enormously badly designed its airway 
crosses its foodway [1.6] there were lots of other fish out there in the sea [0.
6] whose airway didn't cross their foodway [0.8] who had dorsal lungs [0.5] and 
a separate pathway [0.5] but it happened that this one came out [1.4] i'm sure 
if you ran the [0.2] er f-, [0.8] evolution again for a start you wouldn't get 
fishes [0.2] but you might get something like that [0.7] and you probably would 
get things coming out on land because [0.3] twenty-five different groups of 
animals have invaded the land so [0.2] that's a universal [0.9] certainly some 
groups would invade the land [1.5] but [0.8] no no stupid not that way i said 
she's telling him [0.6] and i was asked at a [0.4] science fiction convention 
by one of these ladies in a long dusty dress [0.3] how do you know that it's [0.
8] her that's telling him [0.8] i waited just the right amount of time and said 
[0.2] experience [1.5] [laughter] [groan] [0.6] and i didn't think they had an 
answer to that [1.6] [laughter] 
the other thing about this fish [0.2] the other parochial thing as well as the 
very bad bit of design [0.4] that its airway crosses its foodway [0.4] and ours 
does because it did [1.9] is that [0.3] it mixes up its genital tract [0.2] and 
its excretory system [2.0] there are a lot of things out there the the teleosts 
and the [0.2] elasmobranchs [0.2] which have them pretty well separated [0.2] 
different holes anyway [1.6] but we mix them up and this fish mixes them up [0.
2] therefore its descendants who became extelligent [0.6] like us [1.2] have 
dirty books [1.9] we wouldn't call them dirty books [1.0] if we didn't think 
there was something dirty about sex [0.3] because we mix up our excretory 
system [0.5] with our [1.1] sexual system [0.4] yes [1.2] that's unlikely to 
happen again aliens aren't likely to have novels that we would like reading [3.
1] you see the point [laughter] [4.7] now [0.9] that fish had very peculiar 
limbs [1.2] it probably had eight digits [0.4] it wasn't the fish that it [0.2] 
that [0.3] you start off from that it used to be thought to 
be [0.7] the origin of the land vertebrates when i was a kid [2.0] and [1.2] it 
probably had eight [0.2] but [0.2] most of its descendants refined it to five 
digits the pentadactyl limb [0.8] and you can do a lot of different things with 
it it's one invention [0.8] it's very versatile [0.8] but you won't find it 
anywhere else [3.2] universals [0.2] will happen in some form [0.4] every time 
you run [0.2] carbon based [0.4] watery planets [1.8] parochials [0.6] won't 
happen anywhere else [0.3] er they'll happen sporadically i suppose [0.4] and 
they'll have their own parochials [0.8] not ours [3.5] but [0.7] mixing up [0.
7] parochials and universals is what most people get wrong [0.5] when they 
invent alien ecologies [1.6] here's one way of mi-, me-, [0.3] messing up an 
ecology [0.6] [3.6] oh this i thought i wondered if it was my Monica Lewinsky 
one it is [1.4] [laughter] er [0.6] he's missed with some you notice [1.2] er 
[0.8] the [2.0] too many people who invent alien planets [0.2] give them 
butterflies of course when i have [0.8] pictures of butterflies they're 
screwing butterflies 
but that's [0.2] because i'm me [0.8] and because i have most pictures like 
that [0.7] and they have flowers [1.4] i don't think flowers will happen 
elsewhere i think angiosperms and [0.2] insects [0.2] is one particular 
parochial thing that's happened here [0.6] we don't have [0.4] well we kind of 
do [0.4] there are millipedes that help mosses get sex [1.4] and there are some 
[0.2] underwater ones that are a bit interesting [1.9] and it it somewhere 
between [0.8] a [1.0] which reminds me i haven't put in two slides that i 
should have done [5.3] [laughter] [gasp] we ought [0.9] to [1.8] ask [1.7] for 
a list of [2.8] universals [0.3] okay i can give you that later [0.6] and a 
list of parochials [0.6] now is intelligence [0.3] and particularly 
extelligence [0.2] the culture that we pass on from generation to generation [0.
4] is this [0.5] a universal or a parochial [0.5] well we've only [0.5] it's 
only us that have done it [1.3] some other creatures [0.6] have done it a bit 
[0.6] and i was going to have pictures of [0.6] of bonobos and er orangs i 
think i did not [1.7] but [0.2] if you're going to have 
intelligent life on a planet [2.8] oh that says [0.2] those with brains seem 
okay those with testicles i'm not too sure of [1.8] [laughter] [2.7] right [0.
2] are you going to get intelligence extelligence on a planet [0.4] well on 
this planet we have octopuses [0.4] dolphins [0.4] mantis shrimps [0.9] a lot 
of sporadic creatures that are a good deal more intelligent than their near 
relative [0.4] it seems to me that intelligence is a universal [1.2] but 
extelligence [0.2] i don't know [2.6] the trouble is [0.8] that too many people 
[0.2] that's the least politically [0.4] correct [0.3] slide i had but there 
are some that are close [0.7] er [1.0] there are [4.4] people [0.2] make 
mistakes get things the wrong way round [1.8] for example [0.6] they portray 
aliens [0.3] let's build an extraterrestrial [0.2] okay [1.1] but just a minute 
[0.4] those legs [0.5] and feet [0.3] can only have been [0.2] on this planet 
[0.9] it's a pentadactyl limb [0.8] unless you get fish and that very same fish 
coming out of the water [0.5] you're not 
going to get a leg like that with a knee and an ankle [1.5] got it [0.6] you're 
going to get joints joints in limbs are universal [0.9] but that particular 
pattern of limb [0.9] is a parochial [0.9] yes [1.9] so and i bet his airway 
crosses his foodway looking at him [0.8] yeah [1.0] and this one too [1.3] 
people don't use enough imagination [2.5] like that [0.4] and okay human beings 
are cheap [0.3] to be aliens [0.5] [laughter] if you want them on er [0.3] but 
that's the only reason why you should use human beings [0.5] er he's supposed 
to be half Vulcan and half human [0.9] well i ask you [0.3] what [0.3] progeny 
would you [0.3] get with a cow [0.4] who is your cousin namex [laughter] [1.0] 
as compared with something on the [0.3] on the other si-, er [1.3] no jokes 
about sheep [0.5] er [laughter] [0.6] we what progeny would you get with a 
bacterium [0.8] who is closer related to you [0.3] than something from another 
planet [1.8] we've had stories [0.8] invented by other people [0.3] which say 
[0.3] what are the homeoboxes in D-N-A in the [0.3] these different aliens [1.
2] and that's such parochial thinking [0.3] as if you've 
got to have D-N-A there are about a hundred-and-fifty different compounds [0.3] 
you can use [0.3] to be your hereditary material [0.9] but homeoboxes come on 
[0.6] the same sequence being used [0.7] that's Pine Lawn Fertility Clinic [0.
2] and you have an owl and a pussycat [2.0] now we get some difficult ones but 
i haven't ever had that [1.8] and er [0.8] that is as [0.2] i mean that's so 
much easier than Vulcans and humans [2.2] got the point [3.0] and there are 
people who believe that aliens are just like humans and of course Gary Larson 
[0.7] has it [0.5] have you seen cars with fishes on [2.3] have any Christian 
people who put a fish on their car well [0.3] here's a spaceship look with [0.
5] [laughter] a fish with four eyes [5.1] this comes from [0.2] selfish gene 
thinking it comes from the idea that [0.2] we are our D-N-A made flesh [0.3] 
that the way in which you [0.2] make different kinds of creature [0.2] is 
simply to fudge the D-N-A [0.6] and and there have been a lot of science 
fiction stories for example these Tom Easton's [0.3] tun-, very tongue in cheek 
[0.3] about the gengineers [0.5] the people who take [0.6] a [1.0] the genes 
for the pouch of a kangaroo and put it into a stork [0.4] genome [0.4] and get 
airmail [2.3] [laughter] you can't do that you can't mix and match [0.5] genes 
pick and mix [0.7] and above all you can't [0.3] lose the physics by having 
jellyfish flying up into the air [1.6] or by writing it into the D-N-A [0.7] 
any more than you can write into the D-N-A [0.2] and when you made your sodium 
chloride crystal make it octagonal [3.4] you're limited [0.4] by the real world 
[2.1] but some people don't believe that [1.4] you can't have a reptile that 
big [0.4] you can't have a human being [0.3] with [0.7] haemocyanin in the 
blood instead of haemoglobin 'cause it doesn't work [0.2] and we wouldn't 
develop like a human being if we had haemocyanin [0.3] and anyway you can't get 
something as much like a human being [0.2] or at least an American [0.3] as 
that [1.8] [laughter] on another planet [2.2] we won't get 
molluscs we won't get fishes [0.2] if we ran it again on Earth [2.1] to find 
something like us on another planet is unbelievable [0.8] so science fiction 
authors take great care [0.5] to invent quite different kinds of creatures [0.
3] and then the artists give them pentadactyl limbs [0.4] and [0.6] airways 
that cross foodways [4.7] Gary Larson as always gets it right [0.5] wonderful 
just wonderful so much for instilling them with a sense of awe [4.3] [laughter] 
but look you this one up here's got his arms akimbo [0.4] even though he hasn't 
got proper arms and [0.2] you know [0.6] it it he gets it right [0.4] he's a 
good biologist is Gary Larson [1.8] once again [0.3] wonderful story Close to 
Critical by Hal Clement you're in a sulphuric acid atmosphere much like Venus' 
atmosphere he's got all the chemistry right everything's right [0.3] they don't 
have eyes it's terrific [0.5] but they do have knees and elbows [3.0] and i-, 
knees and elbows won't be found anywhere else [3.0] there 
are some [0.2] that get it right [0.3] i l-, i like this one i like the idea 
the artist had of showing that [0.3] this is a friendly alien 'cause it's got 
its hand on the guy's shoulder and the guy is old and [0.3] isn't minding [1.0] 
it's a nice trick [3.8] that's another nice alien [2.6] yeah [1.6] this one is 
much less likely in some ways than this [5.4] these are rather poor [1.3] E-T 
[0.8] kids today all they want to do is go to Earth and become film stars [2.5] 
[laughter] and of course the other [0.2] famous one [0.5] Alien [2.3] and 
they're [0.3] m-, [0.4] mummy Bobby Joe's playing in the turkey [growl] [0.5] 
[laughter] [0.9] that's [0.2] all our fears put together E-T is all our 
cuddlies put together [1.2] it's nothing to do with what might be out there [2.
8] nor are these Star Wars lot [1.3] and i'm going to take some time now [0.6] 
just five minutes [0.4] to go through [0.2] have i [0.7] have i shown you those 
funny owls before [1.8] no [2.3] 
yes some of you are nodding some of you [1.4] yes you're you're nodding [0.9] 
let me make this point 'cause [0.9] namex's here and of course [0.3] namex's 
here and of course namex probably has er namex has seen those funny owls yeah 
but they're good aren't they [1.2] er [0.8] that's some editing for you i think 
namex [2.0] [laughter] the [2.5] the oddity [0.5] for human beings is this [0.
6] we conduct we don't [0.2] conduct our own development like other creatures 
do [1.9] what we do [1.2] and i hope you've seen [0.2] have i shown you that 
cartoon before [0.2] yeah [0.5] there's a mum there's a baby teaching her 
mother to fetch [1.6] just like a dog [0.9] and rewarding the mother with 
smiles [2.0] because we have a very integrated [0.3] bringing up [0.2] the 
parents are brought in by the child [0.4] to help with the bringing up [0.2] 
our extelligence [0.6] is given to children here's [0.3] a bit of extelligence 
Red Riding Hood [2.9] bit of extelligence [0.4] that we're getting wrong 
breasts and confectionery we're 
showing [0.8] people [0.2] naked bodies now which i think ought to be 
discreetly veiled and and [0.3] exposed only at the proper time [3.1] we're [1.
9] there's a very nice comic called Elf Quest [0.2] the taste of fresh blood 
shared with our forest [0.3] brothers [0.3] i guess those kids are less likely 
to become vegetarian [2.9] and this fox that i shot about five minutes after 
the [0.3] this was [0.8] taken [0.3] because [0.4] he's blind in one eye he's 
got no teeth [1.3] but people get upset because they think about the fox they 
heard about in the nursery [0.7] the fox in the waistcoat [0.2] the fox who was 
sly and cunning [1.6] he isn't that [1.1] i say to you you know what k-, [0.2] 
adjectives do you have for the fox it's always sly and cunning [0.4] in the 
West [0.9] if i asked an Inuit audience [0.7] they would say brave and fast [0.
3] because the fox is the hero in their stories [1.0] i'm trying to expose to 
you the way in which your brains have been made [0.9] and your [0.2] prejudices 
about the organisms we have on Earth [0.5] have been made [1.5] so that when 
you see 
the Star Wars bar scene [0.6] and you see the [0.3] alien who looks like a fox 
[0.2] if you're of Western mind you'd think ooh i wouldn't trust him [1.1] but 
of course if you're an Eskimo you'd say [0.2] he's the one i'd go to if there's 
any trouble [1.4] he's the hero [1.7] so when you're designing aliens it's very 
important to get it right [1.3] to to avoid the things that you've learned 
about kinds of animals now [0.7] you've all learned that owls are wise [1.8] 
and [0.5] when we look at this [2.0] daft owls [1.0] just don't come into it [1.
5] you don't like seeing owls that are daft [1.6] because [0.3] it seems to you 
wrong that they should be you've populated [0.3] your mental universe with 
different kinds of things [0.6] have you seen i don't know if you've seen this 
cartoon [0.3] 
sm0244: yeah [0.2] 
nm0240: Andrew is hesitant remembering his fiasco with the car of straw [0.3] 
have i shown you that one the car of straw [0.6] yes [1.5] yes [0.4] 
sm0245: yeah [0.3] 
sm0246: yeah 
nm0240: yeah [0.3] so [0.2] you know about straw [0.3] one was a car of wood [0.
2] bricks [0.4] a 
car of bricks isn't going to go very well is it [0.7] but the whole one two 
three business is [0.2] built in [0.3] to the way we think [0.4] and will not 
be built into the way aliens think [3.7] but i guess aliens will have [1.4] 
will use their local version of nature they u-, their local kinds of creatures 
[0.2] if they have an extelligence [0.8] because it's the kind of thing that 
mothers tell children in the nest anyway [1.0] whether they will have puberty 
rituals this is a Jewish kid [0.5] at its bar er his bar mitzvah [0.8] whether 
they will have puberty rituals which i think are one of the really important 
ways [0.3] in which we developed ourselves we evolved ourselves [0.5] by 
choosing [0.7] those of us [0.2] who were acquiescient [0.9] who said yes to 
what the elders told us to do [0.4] i'm going to put you down here i'm going to 
[0.4] tie you up [0.2] but don't tie you i just [0.4] put ropes over your hands 
and feet [0.5] and your terror keeps you down there your terror of me [0.6] 
because when i get a [0.2] a branding iron [0.2] and heat 
it in the thing [0.3] to [1.0] put on your cheeks [0.3] you don't leap up and 
run away [0.7] you're proud to get your cheeks branded or your little penis [0.
5] circumcized [0.3] or whatever [0.7] and the ones that weren't proud and 
jumped up and ran away [1.3] didn't breed [1.5] so our ancestors our male 
ancestors were those [0.3] who [0.8] were obedient to authority [1.4] this is a 
view of [0.2] our evolution [0.3] our extelligent evolution [0.4] which doesn't 
only explain Einstein [0.3] you know once upon a time there was a nerve cell [0.
3] then more and more and more nerve cells they got cleverer and cleverer and 
then we got Einstein [0.5] it also explains Eichmann [1.1] why he can say [0.5] 
look how effectively i killed all those Jews [0.3] they didn't worry at all i 
put them [0.2] they thought it was a shower room and [0.4] gas came out of the 
[0.5] the showers [1.5] and he expected not to be punished [0.2] for it [0.2] 
because he'd been doing what he was told [2.4] i recommend you read a book 
called Obedience to Authority by Milgram [0.4] published in the middle 
seventies [0.5] he [0.8] got pe-, he wore a white coat 
and he told people to torture other people and they did [3.3] so [0.7] the deep 
business [1.1] is [2.4] if you're going to invent [0.2] another [0.6] ecology 
[0.5] another ecosystem you must get out of most of the assumptions [0.4] that 
you make without being conscious of it [0.3] about this one [0.4] like [0.5] 
that there are going to be [0.8] vertebrates [1.1] like that they are going to 
be flying forms yes of course there are going to be flying forms [0.5] but 
they're not going to be our flying forms [0.8] or even like them [0.5] there 
might even be a different chemistry [2.2] here he is saying ammonia ammonia [0.
6] [laugh] in the desert [10.8] now the question is have they visited us [7.2] 
[laughter] it says i am not a scale i am a Martian you are standing on my 
testicles [0.8] [laugh] [0.8] er [0.2] i don't know [1.2] but the point is this 
i do know that if they had visited us and they didn't want us to know we 
wouldn't know [0.9] if they're [0.4] capable of 
crossing between [0.4] solar systems [0.9] they're going to be so much better 
at disguise for all we know we have one here [3.7] see the point [1.8] now [0.
2] too many people and you've seen this before but i cannot overuse this [1.5] 
too many people have [0.9] the Hindu view [2.0] they say ah we're going to put 
things on other planets well we're going to put herbivores and we're going to 
put carnivores and we're going to put grass and we're going to put lakes [0.7] 
let's dra-, draw some [0.7] herbivores and some carnivores [0.8] and the slides 
i've left out [0.9] are a picture of a [0.2] heavy [0.2] planet [0.2] alien 
which has got six legs [0.6] and horns [0.6] and a trunk [1.4] a trunk [2.6] 
and [0.4] it's a very good [0.8] picture of an alien [0.3] very well designed 
and it's got eyes that don't work like ours [0.6] and it's altogether a very 
good one but it's got a trunk [0.9] and the trunk [0.2] is an odd thing to 
think about [0.6] is it a parochial [0.2] or is it a universal [0.7] i want you 
to realize that it's not simply [0.3] did it happen several times here [0.5] 
let me give you the argument about a 
trunk [0.3] and as i haven't got a slide [0.5] to put on [0.5] i'll put that 
there [0.5] and then i can wave my arms [1.9] think about a giraffe [1.5] what 
[0.7] think about a giraffe walking [1.9] you've all heard the Kipling business 
about how did the giraffe get its long neck yeah how did the elephant get its 
trunk [3.4] that's deeply embedded in your psyche [0.2] get away from it [0.4] 
think of what the giraffe really is [0.3] the giraffe is [0.2] a s-, a pacing 
[0.2] animal [1.0] pacing is something that most mammals don't do [0.2] the two 
legs on the same side [0.2] at once [1.8] yes [0.7] like llamas but unlike [0.
3] cheetahs [1.1] greyhounds all the dogs even the bears [0.3] who use their 
bottom muscles [0.4] their back legs [0.3] to get [0.6] to locomote [1.9] what 
the [0.3] giraffe does is goes along [0.2] with his legs like a man with a pair 
of crutches [1.6] the the back muscles and the bottom muscles are very small 
the back legs are very small [0.2] his front legs are what are taking him along 
[0.9] the giraffes that escape from lions are the ones with the longer front 
legs [0.6] now that also takes them 
up into [0.4] eating higher things [1.1] but if they've got long legs and not a 
long neck [0.8] they have a problem [0.8] what's the problem [2.4] 
sf0248: they can't get 
nm0240: they can't get water [1.3] without kneeling [0.7] now the okapi is an 
amateur giraffe with long front legs [0.2] and a short neck [0.3] and it has to 
kneel to drink [1.8] now if you kneel somebody gets you [0.7] what the giraffe 
has done it's got its long neck [0.9] and if you see a giraffe drinking it does 
this [0.3] and it can just about get down [2.4] now what the giraffe has done 
the elephant has done [0.5] the elephant leaves its head behind the tube for 
eating [0.4] the giraffe has got its head on the end of the tube for for 
drinking [1.5] but [0.3] the giraffe and the elephant have solved the same 
problem [0.3] how to drink without [0.2] kneeling [1.7] and as soon as you see 
that [0.3] you see it's a universal problem [0.6] and that this heavy planet 
alien is likely to have a trunk [1.0] 'cause it's a way of getting water 
without kneeling [1.9] yes [0.7] and it is contrary to this philosophy [0.6] 
that [1.6] you 
tell me about these things you send the [0.2] the your blind servant off and 
they say it's a leaf [0.2] it's a wall and you say aha it's an elephant [1.4] i 
can't be told anything like that [0.4] about a [0.5] another ecology i can't 
really be told it about this ecosystem [0.3] i don't understand it well enough 
[0.4] if somebody comes along and says there's some stick insect eggs that take 
a long time to hatch [0.3] and here is a giraffe and here is a such and such [0.
7] i'm not going to be able to make sense of that ecology [2.9] and [0.4] as 
always [0.6] it's much more like [3.4] the one i follow on with [1.7] go on [2.
0] you have to construct [0.8] what you understand [1.7] and [0.2] it probably 
isn't helpful having the idea of a an elephant in the background [0.2] either 
[1.1] let's be rude about this one [0.6] this is the people who say [0.2] ah 
well we want [0.3] er some [0.3] intelligent people [0.2] let's use Mr Spock [2.
2] let's design an alien which is terrifying [0.4] let's design an alien which 
is cuddly [0.6] they're the things we know about [3.8] if you go to another 
planet and you think [0.6] here is the so and so these are the 
molluscs these are the [0.7] which is what they're doing [0.5] you probably 
won't get it right [0.4] and i might just as well stop there i i will show you 
the [0.3] B-Z reaction if you haven't seen it [0.9] i'll go up and get it from 
my room now [1.3] er [3.7] i make a lot of money by designing [0.9] er [0.6] 
aliens and alien ecologies for science fiction authors [0.3] have any of you 
read any of my things read a-, any of the West of Eden series by Harry Harrison 
[1.2] how many of you read science fiction [0.9] namex [0.4] er [0.7] few of 
you [0.8] but er you don't know the [0.4] the er [0.2] West of Eden [0.3] 
series that's a world [0.2] where the k-, the meteorite didn't hit [1.2] and er 
[0.3] Legacy of Heorot [0.2] and The Dragons of Heorot is my is my best one [0.
4] er David Gerrold's Chtorr worlds [0.6] i counted up the other day if someone 
had asked me to guess i'd have thought i had about a dozen books [0.4] but i 
counted up and it's much nearer fifty i counted forty-one [0.7] without too 
much trouble [4.2] so [0.7] i've done a lot of this fun [0.5] inventing other 
ecosystems which [0.4] to my untutored eye would probably 
work [1.2] so i'm going to go now get this [1.0] B-Z reaction [0.4] and we can 
have a play with it 
nm0240: there's the heavy planet alien [2.5] okay [0.2] and you can see [0.2] 
universals [0.7] and the question is is the trunk a parochial [1.3] 'cause it 
only happens once [0.5] answer no it's a universal [0.5] because [0.8] here's 
two elephants one of whom is being a giraffe [3.9] [laughter] i'm very lucky to 
get that shot er in [0.6] er the zoo in Israel in near Tel Aviv [0.8] and i [0.
2] that's why you should always take your camera with you [1.9] [1.8] er [0.2] 
having [0.5] done that we should now do the B-Z [0.5] reaction 
nm0240: Belousov [0.2] in nineteen-fifty-six [0.6] tried to get a paper 
published in Nature [0.4] which said [1.6] i'm [3.0] i tried this iodine starch 
[0.2] system [1.1] and a very strange thing has happened which according to the 
second law of therm-, thermodynamics shouldn't be able to happen [0.7] it's 
gone [0.3] blue and then brown and then blue 
and then brown and then blue and then brown [1.6] and you see chemistry should 
only go in one this the the orthodoxy was chemistry should only go in one 
direction [2.3] and the [0.7] er [2.7] and this this seemed totally wrong [0.5] 
and nobody would publish it it took him four years to get it published [2.1] 
and [0.9] when he got it published [1.3] er [1.7] another paper appeared some 
time later by [0.2] Zhabotinsky [0.8] saying [0.2] if we have [0.5] er a system 
with an oxidizing agent like bromate [0.8] and a reducing agent [0.5] like [2.
5] malonic acid [0.8] i think he used acetic acid not malonic acid [2.0] the [0.
2] ho-, and then you have [0.2] a er [3.8] er something which is an electron 
donor and acceptor [0.5] like er a ferrous dye [0.2] or even [0.2] even if you 
have [0.2] ferric chloride [0.3] it works [0.6] er [1.5] the [1.3] whole 
solution [0.8] turns [0.3] blue and then red and then blue and then red and 
then blue and then red [1.9] and [4.0] that can last now while i tell you about 
it [0.6] that will be about five minutes till it gets clear colourless [1.2] 
and er [1.6] what we have here is bromate an oxidizing agent [0.7] and malo-, 
malonic acid which is a 
reducing agent [0.5] it's going to give off carbon dioxide [0.3] we've got this 
[0.7] indicator [0.2] which is an electron donor and acceptor [0.6] goes [0.3] 
have we got an overhead projector that's the important thing yes we have [0.8] 
er [1.1] that [1.2] goes blue when oxidized red when reduced [1.2] and [0.8] 
this reaction [0.3] stops itself by producing carbon dioxide [1.6] so that like 
a forest fire [0.2] or a fairy ring [0.5] it can only go in one direction it 
can't go back on itself [0.4] or a nerve impulse [0.6] it's got to go one way 
[0.9] yes [0.6] now [0.2] what we're going to find is that [2.0] this will [2.
1] reduce [2.4] let's have a look at it on the [0.5] [0.6] a few little spots 
of blue will appear [13.9] oh i need [0.4] something to measure out one ml [0.
6] excuse me 
om0241: sorry 
nm0240: now when i put one ml of this in [0.5] it should go blue and then red 
[1.3] Art Winfree [0.3] who is er [1.7] a very well known chronobiologist [2.2] 
was working with this reaction [0.6] 
in the early nineteen-seventies [0.4] and we were both at a meeting together [0.
3] in namex as it happened [1.2] it ought to go blue [3.9] and [7.4] we agreed 
[0.2] that this is such a beautiful system [1.1] that we ought to get it to 
work for teachers [0.4] and the important thing for teachers [0.3] is that the 
chemicals last for a year [0.7] they can make it up again [0.8] but if they've 
left it from last year and it doesn't work [0.4] they'll get peed off with it 
and they won't think of [0.2] doing it again [1.3] so this the stuff has got to 
l-, [0.2] to last a year see it working [0.6] 
sm0249: yeah 
nm0240: there are little [1.1] spots of the liquid [1.0] are [0.9] appearing 
and as soon as a spot appears it can only go outwards [0.4] because it produces 
carbon dioxide so it can't go back on itself [0.3] until the carbon dioxide has 
[1.0] er [1.2] er 
er evapora-, er s-, has diffused out of the liquid 
nm0240: i [0.4] debated opposite the president of the Creation Research Society 
[0.9] at Birmingham University in the Students' Union [0.5] and all the the 
these creationists were there [0.3] and he was saying you can't get pattern 
from nothing [0.9] you can't get complexity from simplicity [1.8] and i'm 
saying yes you can here it is doing it [1.0] and i say look it it's very robust 
[0.5] you can kill it [4.2] and it'll do it again [10.4] sorry it's got these 
things underneath the the [0.5] er [0.5] it's going to go rather different to 
this time it's going to do it like er Zhabotinsky's original it's going to all 
go blue [1.1] i think [1.2] maybe not [4.7] 
sm0250: isn't that why creation side of something [0.2] where the things begin 
[0.4] 
nm0240: 
i'm sorry [0.3] 
sm0250: [0.7] 
nm0240: they're they're little probably little [0.2] thermal accidents [0.3] 
it's very close to the threshold [0.5] so just by chance if a few molecules are 
going just that little bit [1.1] er more [0.2] what i don't understand and what 
is not understood we have the expert on this reaction in our department [0.3] 
in Maths [0.5] is why it starts again in the middle [5.2] but er Art Winfree 
and i spent a week [0.4] getting it to be as robust as this just mixing four 
chemicals [1.3] and working on a [3.7] but [0.3] what i the point i'm making is 
that most chemistry is like this [0.5] most chemistry is recursive most 
chemistry is autocatalytic [0.6] most chemistry goes on and the things you do 
in school [0.2] are a very small subset of chemistry [1.0] which gives you the 
wrong impression about how simple it is [2.4] look incidentally that in the 
same dish [0.4] you have different oscillation frequencies [2.8] yes [1.7] but 
isn't it pretty [0.8] [laughter] [0.5] i thought i'd shown you 
before [1.1] as a [0.7] an example of a very simple chemical system [0.4] and 
doing its life bit [1.0] it's not bad [1.3] and er [0.9] but of course you do 
realize that [1.0] the [0.2] second law of thermodynamics is actually not 
involved here [0.7] when it goes blue and then red and then blue and then red 
it's not going there and back [0.3] it's going downstairs [0.8] the oxidizer is 
[0.4] oxidizing and the reducing thing is being reduced [0.9] so [0.2] we wound 
up the spring to start with and it's going downhill [3.0] on the tread [0.2] 
it's blue [0.2] on the [0.2] riser it's red [1.7] okay [0.2] 
sm0251: how long does it keep going for 
nm0240: half an hour [3.7] but isn't it pretty [1.5] and i m-, i've always got 
some in the fridge if you want to show it to your friends take it to the park 
[2.4] [laughter] you can always er [4.5] there we go again [4.5] [laughter] but 
er as i say Art Winfree 
and i were playing with sta-, iodine and starch and chlorates and iodates [0.3] 
and er [0.2] acetic acid and malonic acid and malic acid [0.5] and er [1.1] 
we've had an excursion into aspirin [0.4] for a [0.9] for a while because 
salicylates er do [0.2] fairly odd things [0.6] but [4.2] if you believe that 
go-, a God is necessary [0.3] for making pattern [0.3] that's to say you 
believe in conservation of complexity [0.8] read [0.2] Collapse of Chaos [3.3] 
the the er [0.4] the formula for this [0.2] is in both of those books [2.7] 
'cause when i do something i use it to death [0.3] like so many of these 
cartoons [laughter] [1.3] [3.1] but if you've not seen it [0.4] there we are [1.
2] leave it to you
