nm0253: welcome er to the first year laboratory class [0.3] as you know er 
biological sciences is an experimental science [0.3] everything we know about 
biology we have learned either by c-, careful observation of living organisms 
[0.4] or through experiments er experimental work in in biology [0.6] what we 
are doing in this course of biological sciences is training you to become [0.3] 
professional biologists [0.3] so obviously that includes training you in 
laboratory methods [0.4] more than that [0.2] it involves training you in how 
to observe [0.3] and how to report [0.2] your observations [0.4] so if you 
intend to become a professional biologist [0.3] evidently [0.3] er this 
laboratory course is extremely important to you [0.6] even if you don't intend 
to become a professional biologist [0.3] we all think that training in 
laboratory methods is very valuable to you [0.3] in the sense of transferable 
skills [0.2] because [0.3] the skills of observing [0.3] understanding and 
reporting are going to be useful to you in any profession whatever 
profession you choose be it biology [0.2] or being a policeman [0.2] or being 
an accountant [0.2] or whatever [0.3] so we think that these laboratory courses 
are extremely valuable and extremely important to you [0.3] so you are now 
launched [0.3] into your career as a professional biologist i should say [1.0] 
there's a number of things that i need to talk to you about as a sort of 
introduction to the laboratory class [0.3] er and they're all [0.2] listed on 
this board here [0.3] er which i will leave up for you to look at later on 
perhaps if you need to [0.6] so the first [0.3] point i want to make the first 
thing i want to talk about [0.3] is the staff [0.3] who are going to be running 
this particular class [0.6] er you know me i'm namex [0.2] my colleagues [0.2] 
over there [0.2] er there's namex who will put his hand up [0.5] namex [0.6] 
namex er [0.3] sorry namex she's recently changed her name which always 
confused me namex [0.4] namex he has a nickname [laughter] which i'm going not 
going to release [0.2] to 
you you may you may find out later [0.5] and namex [0.3] the first three and [0.
2] and me [0.2] will be [0.4] most of the time in the laboratory working with 
you [0.3] namex er will be upstairs in the computer room [0.3] where he will be 
offering you assistance in in working with P-Cs i'll come back to that in a 
moment [0.4] so those are the staff the other extremely important member of 
staff whom i don't immediately see namex [0.5] there you are over there [0.2] 
put your hand up [0.3] namex [0.3] is the a member of the technical staff now 
her function is extremely important [0.3] in that if equipment goes wrong or 
you don't have the right chemicals or something like that [0.3] you go to namex 
and she will always be able to sort you out she's much better at those sorts of 
things [0.4] than the members of staff other members of staff are so namex is 
the person to look after your [0.3] technical problems [0.2] and other problems 
i'm quite sure [0.2] technical problems here [0.9] right now you have in front 
of you been given a green folder [0.5] now that green folder [0.2] 
contains [1.0] one or two [0.2] useful bits for you [0.6] a floppy disk how 
about that [0.6] and [0.5] a black marker pen [0.3] these are things that you 
will be using throughout your laboratory class [0.3] classes [0.2] 
unfortunately if you lose them we shan't be giving you any others [0.4] er 
there are other things in here [0.4] er books about safety [0.2] and little 
little er [0.2] books leaflets about safety [0.3] which you need to use which 
we'll have to use we'll talk about that again in a moment [0.7] er and [0.2] 
what else is there [1.4] hazards related [0.3] things like that [0.7] little 
odds and ends [0.2] so there's a few free free gifts that you might like [0.2] 
not quite as grand as the free gifts you get when you open your bank account 
but they will be [0.2] in this laboratory class perhaps more valuable [1.0] 
okay [0.8] now [0.3] a daybook [0.6] this is something that we talked about a 
little bit [0.3] er when we talked to you initially with namex you remember [0.
7] the purpose of a daybook [0.6] is an extremely important 
thing [0.5] er because you c-, record in your daybook your immediate 
observations as you are making your observations so you're noting down data 
that you are generating [0.4] and i-, more importantly [0.4] you write down 
what you've actually done [0.5] i-, i-, i-, in your experimental work [0.8] 
your daybook has to be a working record [0.2] of your experimental [0.4] 
studies [0.5] working record which has got to be sufficiently quality 
sufficiently good quality [0.2] so that if i want to sit down and read it [0.3] 
i can learn from that daybook what you have actually done [0.6] now this is 
something that you must learn [0.4] er [0.2] our PhD stdents are obliged to do 
it even more so [0.3] er post-doctoral research fellows as a scientist of 
course we all use a daybook and the daybook [0.4] has to be [0.3] so good that 
you can always know what you've actually done [0.5] er and more importantly so 
that somebody else can know what you've actually done in the future [0.5] okay 
[0.2] so that's tremendously important [0.3] it also [0.2] is a check for us 
that you have actually attended the 
class [0.4] as namex pointed out in the past some wicked people have come into 
the class [0.3] signed on to the list [0.3] and then gone [0.2] and nicked the 
data from somebody else and written it up and got credit now that's obviously 
[0.3] not allowed [0.3] so the daybook [0.2] has to be checked [0.2] by a 
member of the staff before you leave the laboratory and signed [0.4] now what i 
like [0.4] people to do members of staff to do [0.3] is actually run through 
the daybook what you've done [0.4] and ask you [0.2] er about it [0.3] er and 
make sure that it is of a suitable standard and i prefer people not to leave 
the laboratory [0.4] until the the staff member is satisfied that your daybook 
is adequate [0.4] okay [0.2] if it's not adequate it won't be signed [0.6] i 
think that's actually quite important [0.3] and that's some er s-, something [0.
3] that you need to be trained in [0.5] er in some [0.2] laboratories 
particularly commercial laboratories [0.3] er and particularly [0.3] er 
laboratories in hospitals where diagnostic er work is being done [0.3] the 
daybook [0.5] takes on a particular importance for commercial 
reasons [0.4] or for or reasons to do with the the quality of diagnosis in the 
laboratory or whatever [0.3] so as a professional biologist you will always be 
using a daybook [0.3] so get into the habit of using it properly now [1.4] okay 
[0.2] next point [0.7] that i want to talk about [0.3] is the reports [0.7] now 
i won't remind you of the biblical story about hiding your light under a bushel 
[0.3] if you have done the most marvellous experimental work discovered the 
most important things in science [0.3] but don't report it [0.4] in a clear 
fashion so that other people can understand it [0.3] you have been wasting your 
time [0.5] so the importance of the report is communication [0.5] if you don't 
write a good report you really are wasting your time [0.5] okay [0.3] now [0.3] 
we [0.2] want to train you again [0.5] er in developing and producing a 
professional [0.3] style [0.5] report [0.4] we model the laboratory reports on 
a scientific paper [0.3] that is the way in which professional scientists 
report their work in the scientific literature [0.6] now 
this [0.2] style of reporting is probably rather different from the style of 
writing up experiments that you've learned at school [0.4] we have to [0.4] 
encourage you [0.3] to unlearn [0.2] what you've learned at school [0.3] and 
relearn [0.3] what you will do [0.2] as a professional biologist [0.4] so i [0.
2] sincerely hope that you have all read [0.3] what is in the manual [0.3] 
about how to write a report [0.3] and i will repeatedly over the next few weeks 
[0.3] be [0.2] alluding to how to present your data and how to write the report 
because it is so important [0.3] it's one of those transferable skills that i 
referred to at the beginning [0.6] so we lay out the report [0.5] fairly 
formally [0.4] er as [0.2] with a starting off with a summary which is a 
summary of the whole of your report [0.6] all of it [1.1] then the introduction 
the importance of the introduction is to set the background to the experimental 
work you're going to be describing a little bit of description [0.3] of [0.3] 
previously understood facts or whatever [0.5] then you er [0.2] bring in a 
section which is [0.4] talking about your methodology [0.3] 
now in general [0.3] your methodology section in these reports doesn't need to 
be very long [0.3] because as you know [0.3] the methodology is all written 
down in in the green manual [0.3] and there's no point no point at all [0.3] in 
your copying out chunks of the green manual [0.2] into your report [0.3] so 
don't if there is material that's in the green manual [0.3] just refer to the 
green manual [0.3] for example [0.2] methods were carried out [0.2] just 
exactly as in the manual [0.4] and [0.3] nothing to add [0.3] but [0.5] if you 
do actually design [0.3] a little bit of i-, er methodology yourself which you 
will be expected to do to do increasingly [0.4] or if the methodology is varied 
from what's in the green book [0.4] obviously you do need to point out in the 
in in your [0.2] er report [0.2] that you have changed that bit of methodology 
or developed that bit of methodo-, [0.3] methodology or invented whatever that 
methodology [0.6] okay [0.5] now [0.5] the next section of your report is the 
one that is really vital [0.6] it is [0.3] results [0.2] your observation [0.3] 
what 
you have discovered from the experiments you have done [0.5] now [0.6] very 
many st-, [0.2] students actually [0.3] tend to skimp on this section a-, and 
write it very briefly perhaps they just present a table of data [0.3] or a 
diagram and say these are the results full stop [0.4] that is not adequate [0.
3] in your results section what you have to do is say in words in good concise 
literate scientific English [0.3] say [0.2] what you have observed [0.6] and 
you use your diagrams your figures [0.3] to support and illustrate [0.3] what 
you have said in words [0.2] so [0.2] what [0.2] i am trying to put over is 
that your results section must be an integration [0.4] of [0.6] English 
language description of what you've done [0.3] and [0.6] diagrams and figures 
[0.2] which support your description this is very important to work the 
diagrams and your text together [0.8] okay [0.5] now [0.2] what do you report 
[0.3] very often people say to me well you know i haven't really s-, [0.3] 
observed very much [0.2] i can't there's not much to say [0.6] er in fact in 
all these practicals these practicals that we're 
running initially [0.4] are fairly simple and straightforward practicals and 
there's not [0.2] one [0.3] hell of a bundle of stuff that you can report [0.3] 
but very often people leave out [0.3] quite important little observations which 
actually are [0.2] germane germinal whatever [0.4] to to your observations to 
to your to your experiment [1.1] and i shall bring those up as they come around 
can't talk about them in in advance 'cause that would of course be giving the 
game away [0.7] so [0.3] your results report [0.3] your observations [0.4] and 
finally [0.5] your discussions [0.3] or conclusions whatever you like to call 
it [0.3] what that section really must do [0.2] is trying to draw out [0.3] of 
your experimental work [0.3] whatever new findings you have [0.3] and relate 
them back to the background material [0.3] you have presented in your 
introduction so that you go around the full circle [1.2] now what i've been 
doing is really [0.3] describing the ideal [0.4] er and [0.2] until you get a 
little bit more advanced as an experimental biologist [0.4] er perhaps there 
won't be so 
much to say [0.4] don't worry about that but there is always something to say 
and that's something i shall be coming back to [0.3] repeatedly [0.4] so this 
skill [0.5] of [0.2] writing a scientific report [0.3] is something that [0.2] 
we hope very much will develop [0.3] over the next [0.3] weeks [1.1] sooner the 
better [0.4] i reckon [1.4] so let me just go on [0.3] briefly to talk about [0.
3] personal computers P-Cs [0.6] [0.2] as you have noticed [0.7] excuse me [1.
2] around the university there are there are plenty of er I-B-M style P-Cs for 
your use [0.3] there is in the room above this about twenty P-Cs [0.3] which 
obviously [0.2] are are for your use when [0.2] when in in the laboratory [0.3] 
and there are other rooms around the university [0.8] you have to get used to 
using P-Cs to do your work on [0.2] now [0.3] i'm quite sure that nearly or 
most of you [0.2] are already very familiar [0.2] er with using I-B-M style P-
Cs [0.5] er [0.7] i'm quite sure that everybody in the room [0.3] let me let me 
just check [0.2] 
is there anybody that's never used [0.2] a personal computer [0.9] no [0.5] 
course not [0.9] are there people here who [0.4] er prefer to work with Macs if 
so hard luck sorry [0.6] 'cause you'll have to work with P-Cs 'cause that's 
what the university uses [0.5] now [0.4] most of you as i as i'm quite sure 
will be fairly familiar with P-Cs but there will be a few of you [0.4] who are 
not that familiar [0.3] or [0.3] perhaps having been brought up on Macs don't 
really understand P-Cs don't worry [0.3] we have help in store [0.4] as you 
know [0.3] the information technology er whatever they call themselves [0.2] er 
unit [0.3] down the road there [0.3] publish [0.4] useful [0.3] guidebooks [0.
4] er to the [0.3] to the software that we have [0.4] but more immediately [0.
4] namex [0.3] the one member [0.4] who is not going to be in the lab [1.2] 
will be the guy [0.2] who's going to be in the P-C room upstairs [0.3] waiting 
for people to come along asking for help [0.5] he is [0.3] an expert [0.4] he 
knows everything there is to be known about Microsoft and P-Cs and things like 
that [0.4] so if you are uncertain how to use Excel to 
draw diagrams uncertain how to use [0.4] the World Wide Web [0.3] to get useful 
scientific information or anything like that [0.3] go and talk to namex in the 
P-C room [0.3] he'll be there basically from eleven o'clock to three o'clock [0.
2] with a lunch break [0.9] okay [1.6] now [1.2] next [0.7] point [0.5] 
extremely [0.4] important point that i want to make [0.3] is this issue of 
safety [0.6] er as namex [0.2] pointed out when we talked previously [0.4] we 
haven't yet lost permanently [0.2] an undergraduate through an accident in the 
laboratory [0.3] and we never want that to happen obviously [0.3] there have 
been occasions where people have been injured [0.3] and have been hurt quite 
badly [0.3] er so [0.3] we have to be sure [0.2] have to be very careful [0.3] 
er that you are aware of s-, ri-, safety hazards risks in the laboratory [1.2] 
now i do actually [0.3] formally [0.3] have to [0.3] ask you [0.4] er [0.2] [0.
6] well [0.9] let me go through in order i've got a number of points written 
down [0.3] there is one absolute rule for insurance reasons [0.3] 
if there is no staff member in the laboratory [0.3] you should not be here [0.
7] okay [0.4] because we have to supervise you and if there's no supervision [0.
4] the university's insurance policy is void [0.4] so [0.3] look out for 
somebody [0.3] can be somebody in the prep room but always check [0.7] that 
there is somebody to supervise you [0.6] the next thing [0.2] i have to ask you 
to do [0.3] is to fill out [0.4] sorry [0.2] is to read [0.6] this little [0.4] 
safety leaflet Health and Safety in Laboratories Instructions for 
Undergraduates [0.5] you must read this [0.5] and [0.2] towards the back or the 
back page not quite sure [0.3] there is a declaration [1.3] i have read it [0.
2] signed [0.3] okay you tear this thing off the end [0.3] and put it in a 
basket at the back there namex is the basket's ready 
nf0254: and er [0.2] to write them in capital letters on the front 
nm0253: write your name in capital letters [0.3] a squiggle a scrawl [0.3] 
that's incomprehensible [0.2] causes us all sorts of problems [0.3] 'cause we 
have to check against the list of names that everybody [0.3] has 
actually signed this [0.2] so sign it but also put your name in capitals please 
[0.4] now if we don't have these declarations back [0.5] er within a very short 
time [0.2] we will be chasing you [0.4] er and maybe even exclude you from the 
laboratory because this is an essential [0.2] essential thing that you simply 
must do [1.8] okay [1.2] now [0.2] few points that i have to do a little bit 
like the [0.4] er air hostess [0.4] down there you have a fire exit [0.7] down 
there you have a fire exit [0.9] down there you have a fire exit every public 
room has to have at least three fire exits and there they are [0.2] okay [0.5] 
so if there's a fire alarm sounds as there was yesterday at half past three [0.
3] well then those are the ways out [0.9] okay [1.4] fire extinguishers are 
also located and fire is there a fire blanket namex is there a fire blanket in 
the place 
nf0254: there's no fire blanket 
nm0253: there's no fire blanket [0.4] okay [0.3] er but there are fire 
extinguishers and they [0.2] likewise are located by the doors so just [0.4] be 
aware that those things are available [0.3] of course as you 
know if a fire starts in the laboratory [0.3] er you evac-, we evacuate the 
laboratory [0.3] and we only [0.8] fight the fire if that is [0.5] er [0.2] 
doesn't risk our safety [0.4] okay [0.4] i need i have to tell you that [0.9] 
be absolutely clear that you understand these issues [1.7] now [0.8] you wash 
yourselves on the way out that's a standard safety regulation [0.5] so that you 
aren't [0.2] carrying contamination on your hands [0.4] if by accident you get 
something in your eye there is an eyewash [0.3] down there [0.3] okay by the [0.
3] handwash so [0.4] anything in your eye [0.3] go down there and [0.2] wash 
out your eye and you obviously a member of staff will be [0.4] on top of you 
very quickly to help you [0.9] er [0.3] i should say [0.5] that you should 
treat all chemicals as dangerous within reason o-, obviously not H-two-O i mean 
don't worry too much about that but concentrated H-C-L [0.6] er and other 
suchlike chemicals [0.2] you should treat [0.2] with respect [0.2] you know 
that from school i'm quite sure [0.6] er [1.3] you should [0.4] treat [0.4] all 
micro-organisms that we use in the laboratory [0.2] as potential pathogens now 
we 
do not give you pathogenic micro-organisms to work with should we be so foolish 
no we'd lose all our undergraduates wouldn't we [0.6] so [0.2] the [0.2] path-, 
mi-, micro-organisms we give you to work with [0.4] are are not pathogenic [0.
3] but we want to train you in the handling [0.4] of pathogenic organisms [0.2] 
so [0.4] if you're asked to work with [0.4] er what is it [0.6] that yeast 
whose name always escapes me saccharomyces [0.5] it's not cerevisiae is it it's 
carlsbergensis that's right [0.4] er [0.3] if you're asked to work with that 
yeast it is completely harmless you can make bread with it if you really want 
to [0.4] er but you should treat it [0.3] er as [0.2] a potential pathogen and 
handle it as such [0.2] this is part of your training [1.7] right [0.4] i'm [0.
4] coming [0.4] to an end now all these things you will immediately forget i'm 
quite sure but you will be reminded don't worry [1.2] so i'm coming close again 
and there are these headers here [0.6] er the lab routines [1.7] er [1.1] you 
will find usually [0.7] the er necessary equipment and men-, sometimes the 
chemicals that you need to work with on the bench in front of you [1.8] 
additional materials are over there [0.4] sometimes over here [0.4] so if you 
want need to get any additional materials you go o-, [0.2] go and get them 
bring them to your bench [0.9] when you finish for the day [0.2] you leave the 
lab clean and tidy or at least as clean and tidy as you possibly can [0.3] so 
that means [0.3] get rid of [0.2] glassware that you've used there is always 
going to be er [0.2] bins for glassware over there [0.3] yes [0.3] er we will 
tell you in more detail as we go around what to do with glassware [0.3] but 
basically everything you've used must be put back [0.6] er everything that you 
use [0.5] sorry well [0.2] rephrase that [0.3] everything that is [0.3] 
reusable should be back [0.2] put back where you got it [0.4] er like pipette 
holders or whatever [0.3] everything that needs to be washed [0.3] needs to go 
into one of the bins [0.5] to be taken away and washed for you [0.2] so leave 
your bench clean and tidy turn off anything electrical [0.5] make sure that you 
don't leave any spillages on the bench and that sort of thing [0.4] okay just 
as though you were working in your kitchen 
at home or whatever leave it [0.4] in a decent state [2.3] okay [0.6] now 
that's actually a lot of information [0.5] that i've given in a short time [0.
5] er [1.2] s-, a lot of these points i shall be coming back to later [0.3] er 
there will be specific [0.2] er points made about specific safety hazards for 
example [0.4] er and i shall be talking again about reports [0.4] so perhaps [0.
2] that you [0.3] have not memorized everything i've said is not [0.5] er a 
terrible bad thing but i hope i've given you some sort of introduction and an 
st-, understanding about how we run these courses [0.5] this course [0.8] er 
now [0.3] let me [0.4] are there any questions i know there are questions there 
always are questions but this is a slightly forbidding environment [0.5] for 
asking questions [0.6] er if there are things that are [0.3] gentleman over 
there [0.2] 
sm0255: er [0.2] do we er get a break 
nm0253: do you get a break [1.1] you get a break yes i don't [0.2] er not 
really [laughter] [1.1] what we do i 
generally run the laboratory straight through i [0.2] unless there's a special 
reason i don't close the laboratory at lunchtime [0.4] so you take [0.5] breaks 
[0.2] for lunch or whatever [0.4] comfort breaks [0.3] as necessary [0.2] 
through the day [0.4] yeah there is no specific time [0.3] so the laboratory 
starts [0.3] er at eleven-fifteenish or eleven-thirty by the time i finish 
talking [0.3] and goes through until you finish [0.4] er obviously if you need 
to go out for a particular reasons then you do so this is not a prison [0.3] 
okay [1.0] any others [2.1] ah [0.2] yes [0.7] 
sf0256: do we [0.5] when we work with our partners and things do we both have 
to record [0.5] results in our daybooks 
nm0253: oh yes indeed 
nm0257: the question 
nm0253: the question was [0.3] when we're working in a as in a partnership of 
two [0.3] should both partners record the information in their daybooks [0.2] 
of course you should [0.3] er these are your your own workbooks your own [0.4] 
er independent records of what you've done [0.6] er inevitably there's boxing 
and coxing [0.2] and one person will perhaps be actually doing the er the 
experimentation and the other person is taking notes [0.3] and then you swap y-,
or whatever [0.3] er and you transfer the the notes [0.2] between the two of 
you obviously [0.2] you develop a working partnership [0.4] but everybody [0.2] 
has to have [0.2] their own daybook properly completed [0.5] and signed by the 
end of the day [1.1] okay [0.2] and i know namex talked about working in pairs 
the other day so i'm not going to er go over that again [0.4] er except to say 
that [0.4] i hope you have found yourself partnerships [0.4] er [0.2] if 
there's rearrangement that's fine if you want to move around a bit that's fine 
[0.5] er [0.2] get to make sure you get with somebody that you can work with [0.
3] but once [0.2] that partnership is established it has to stay put [0.9] 
really [1.5] more questions [0.4] we will be walking around [0.2] all day [0.4] 
so questions that arise [0.4] during the day [0.4] we will answer individually 
obviously [1.4] okay [3.1] good [0.2] now [0.2] today's [0.2] little bit of 
work [0.4] i assume everybody's read [0.2] the [0.3] manual [0.4] er and and 
everybody will have noticed that it's a fairly straightforward experiment [0.4] 
er basically it's a titration of an acid against a base [0.3] in which you [0.
4] examine [0.2] the way P-H changes when you do that titration [0.6] you can 
draw a number of interesting and useful conclusions about biology from these 
very simple [0.4] expe-, this very simple [0.2] exercise [0.4] er in P-H [0.3] 
metering [0.6] er [1.0] it is [0.6] deliberately made simple because this is 
your first day in the laboratory we wouldn't ask you to be doing difficult 
things because [0.4] er it it it simply wouldn't work [0.4] so it's a simple 
experiment [0.3] it is not a negligible experiment though there are things 
which you do need to record properly [1.8] one thing i [0.2] have [0.4] to 
confess to is that we never have enough apparatus [0.6] er in particular [0.5] 
er we have [0.4] insufficient P-H meters to give every pair a P-H meter now 
there are eighty-odd 
students here [0.3] forty pairs we have twenty-something P-H meters [0.3] i'm 
sorry about that [0.3] er the university just couldn't [0.3] would not 
countenance [0.4] er buying forty P-H meters to be used on two two days in the 
year [0.9] now this is a problem which scientists all the time are facing they 
never have enough equipment enough apparatus they never have the most recent 
piece [0.8] they always have to go and cadge borrow and share [0.7] and so 
that's [0.5] an important principle that you're going to learn [0.4] is that 
you're going to have to [0.3] er [0.5] share apparatus with other people share 
equipment particularly P-H meters today [0.4] so what you will find is that the 
quick ones will have grabbed the P-H meters [0.3] the slow ones [0.3] will be 
without P-H meters [0.7] don't despair be patient [0.2] there are always other 
things that you can be doing [0.2] whilst waiting for the P-H meter to become 
available [0.3] there are solutions to make up [0.4] there are daybooks to 
write up [0.6] there will be in following weeks [0.2] er your reports to 
discuss with 
the staff i forgot to say the staff will [0.3] er read through your reports [0.
3] annotate them [0.2] and discuss with them we with [0.4] discuss them with 
you as necessary the following week [0.7] okay [1.0] ah [0.3] the other thing 
i've forgotten to say [0.3] is handing in of reports [0.3] there are baskets at 
the back there [0.6] er and today's class that is the Thursday class [0.3] has 
to hand in their report [0.4] thank you namex [0.3] basket's at the back there 
[0.5] er [0.2] the Thursday class has to hand in their report [0.3] by noon the 
following Tuesday [0.6] now [0.2] these reports aren't yet being assessed [0.2] 
so you lose no credit if you don't give them in [0.3] but what you will lose [0.
3] is the staff member's criticism of your report discussion of your report [0.
2] so get them there by midday on Tuesday [1.0] okay [0.2] and when they're 
assessed [0.3] as you probably know [0.2] if you're late you will be penalized 
[0.3] so [0.8] that's [0.7] an aside which has made me forget what i was saying 
[0.2] right [0.2] waiting for equipment [0.2] er there are always other things 
you 
can do [0.7] whilst waiting for equipment to become available go and have lunch 
say [1.3] nearly lunchtime already isn't it [0.6] or go up to the P-C room [0.
4] and familiarize yourself with the P-Cs or look at your e-mail or whatever [0.
3] so although [0.3] you might feel a bit cross that you can't immediately get 
hold of a P-H meter [0.4] do not think oh gosh [0.3] it's a waste of time [0.3] 
you must be [0.2] using your time [0.2] planning your time through the day and 
again that's a thing you have to learn [0.5] when you can't have what you want 
immediately well then you have to find [0.4] other ways of using your time 
profitably [0.7] something that takes some people decades to learn i'm not sure 
that i've learned it yet but i'm trying [1.3] right [0.2] now what i've got to 
do now [0.5] er is divide you up into sort of ad hoc groups [0.3] so that the 
staff members can [0.3] gather you together [0.4] in order to talk about 
today's class [0.4] what we're actually doing [0.7] er what i've always done is 
walked around [0.3] the room [0.4] counting off [0.9] students and saying this 
is group A this is 
group B this is group C and this is group D [0.6] and then namex [0.3] will 
take group A [1.1] namex will take group B [0.8] namex will take group C [0.7] 
and i'll have group [0.5] D yes that's yeah [0.7] so that's what i'm going to 
do now [0.3] er [0.2] when we move from these introductory classes to the 
subsequent classes [0.3] we will reform those groups for [0.3] for for [0.2] 
for reasons again to do with the structure of the of the starting [0.3] of the 
classes [0.3] but these are ad hoc groups er er and will not be permanent [0.4] 
so that's what i have to do now is walk around [0.3] counting you off [0.8] 
okay [0.5] so i'll start off with [1.4] do any of my [0.4] colleagues have 
anything they need they feel i've left out [0.2] that i need to add [0.5] no [1.
3] okay namex are you happy with everything i've said 
nf0254: yes [0.5] 
nm0253: good okay so i'll walk around [1.0] this is group A [0.3] so one [0.2] 
two [0.6] three four [1.3] five six seven [0.3] eight nine [2.5] ten [0.2] 
eleven [0.6] twelve thirteen fourteen [0.3] fifteen sixteen [2.1] seventeen 
eighteen that's a bit awkward 'cause it overflows the bench [0.3] 
so that's group A [0.7] okay with namex 
nm0257: so you're with me [0.3] 
sm0258: yes 
nm0253: right [0.2] now we go on to group B [0.2] one [0.3] two [1.0] three 
four [0.2] five six [3.0] seven eight [0.3] nine ten [0.3] eleven twelve 
thirteen fourteen fifteen [0.4] sixteen seventeen [0.9] eighteen nineteen [1.1] 
this is where my arithmetic starts to break down i'm afraid so [0.5] so if 
anybody can help me i'm [0.2] very glad 
sm0259: keep going [0.7] 
nm0253: one [0.2] two [0.6] three [0.2] four [3.6] five six seven eight nine 
ten eleven twelve [0.2] thirteen fourteen fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen [1.
0] okay [0.6] and then that's group D [2.0] so what i want to do now what i 
want you to do rather [0.6] is to [0.4] sort of get into a huddle perhaps [0.2] 
group A at that end group B at that end [0.3] group C at that end [0.3] and 
group D at that end [0.2] so the staff members can get with you [0.7] talk you 
through [0.5] what you're doing today and answering your questions
