nm1141: two sets of handouts coming round er the blue handout which you've now 
all got [0.5] and a single white sheet [0.8] i should just explain that i was 
experimenting [0.4] er scanning and then taking things into this handout and 
that has meant that some of the material isn't [0.4] as clear as it should be 
[0.5] er [0.2] and i will remedy that by giving you a supplementary sheet which 
has those images [0.3] clearer next time we meet [0.7] er so that's [0.3] th-, 
th-, the second sheet is a white sheet which is just an extra one which i 
hadn't er [0.6] included as i worked on the lecture [1.1] er [0.5] i should say 
[0.3] as we go through this lecture [0.5] the-, there's there's a lot of 
illustrations on thi-, in this lecture [0.5] and i may not follow the handout 
slavishly in other words everything that's on the handout will be covered but 
not necessarily in the order that it's er on the handout [0.7] er [0.5] what i 
suggest you do is that i will try to make s-, i'm going to sort of [0.2] talk 
without slides to start with [0.8] er the introductory remarks [0.4] and then 
er [0.6] we'll go into sort of slides and 
so on er and [0.2] what you really ne-, need to try and do is to use the 
handout as a kind of aide-memoire [0.6] of the issues and so on that we're 
talking about [0.8] now [0.3] you might also think that er high technology T-V 
has hit us [0.5] er namex is from er the Centre for Applied Language Studies [0.
4] they are doing some research into the vocabulary it's funny int-, int-, 
isn't it interesting you went quiet when i started this there was a kind of [0.
6] a a buzz while i was talking until the high technology bit came in [0.4] and 
you thought i was in in for it [0.4] er [0.7] they are doing some research into 
the vocabulary which er different academics use [0.4] er in order that they can 
better equip students international students coming here with the kinds of 
things that we say [0.4] swings and roundabouts was the expression given as an 
example to me just now [0.5] which was apparently used in four times in a 
lectures or in four pe-, four 
of1142: four times in thirty lectures 
nm1141: four times in thirty lectures and they hadn't [0.2] realized 
it you know swings and roundabouts might be a phrase we would use a lot but 
international students wouldn't recognize [0.4] so here i am [0.3] er strapped 
up [0.2] er [0.4] fortunately er Jeremy Paxman isn't in the audience [0.5] er 
[0.2] and hopefully er [0.2] namex will get some useful material [1.5] okay 
today's topic is [0.2] trends in office design and development [1.3] and as the 
opening quote says er [0.5] yeah office buildings are one of these great icons 
of the twentieth se-, century [0.5] and i'm going to show some slides in a 
minute which which perhaps give some il-, illustration of that [0.5] an a 
visible index of economic activity [0.2] social technology financial progress 
[0.7] they've come to symbolize much of what this century is about [0.8] er 
what i'm going to be doing during the course of this lecture is [0.4] taking 
you through [0.3] different periods if you like er of office development [1.3] 
er and [0.2] the factors if you like [0.5] er that condition [0.2] the u-, the 
the types of buildings we create [0.4] how we create them [0.4] how we use them 
[1.3] and also and this is very significant in the 
context of property development [0.4] er whilst [0.2] work patterns change very 
fast by office cultures change perhaps very fast [0.4] of course the fabric is 
essentially rather static [0.5] you build a building and you might 
traditionally have expected it to been there sixty years [0.5] well we've got 
some nineteen-sixties we've got m-, some much older office buildings [0.5] some 
of which er s-, certainly er [0.5] are n-, [0.5] are still there but are pretty 
redundant [0.4] others have been through various processes of alterations [0.3] 
others soon will have to be altered [0.3] the fact is the stock of buildings [0.
3] er [0.2] i-, is very fixed [0.3] er [0.2] despite the types of changes that 
are going on [0.3] er in the demands we make on those buildings [0.5] so i want 
to after some introductory remarks er cover these sort of different periods of 
of office development the nineteen-sixties' and as i've said seventies' 
building [0.7] the bürolandschaft which is a sort of open plan office building 
buildings of the nineteen-eighties [0.5] big bang offices [0.2] big bang is 
something 
which has kind of probably passed you by [0.4] it was the deregulation of the 
Stock Exchange in the mid-nineteen-eighties [0.4] er and that resulted in 
certain sorts of office buildings being created particularly in the City of 
London [0.6] nineteen-nineties' office buildings [0.4] i've put on the handout 
this issue of office buildings and the city [0.4] the impact that buildings 
have [0.4] on the form if you like and character of our towns but i'm not going 
to talk too much about that [0.6] and then some er concluding remarks [1.7] so 
let's start with [0.2] er [0.2] this the introduction before we go into the [0.
3] lights down [0.5] visuals on and all the rest of it [2.6] on the handout i 
say that there are four [0.2] aspects er [0.4] if you like which you need to 
understand in trying to understand office development [0.7] and i've also given 
you to sort of [0.4] er [0.4] flesh that out which i wa-, just want you to have 
in the back of your mind as you go through the talk [0.4] this diagram [0.6] er 
which in a kind of way are also four aspects aspects to do with the workplace 
[0.4] 
systems [0.3] culture and finance just have that [0.8] er in the back of your 
mind and you can come back and and reread it [0.7] er because it kind of 
provides a context for what we're going to be talking about [0.8] but the four 
that i've listed on the handout came from [0.4] er a a a [0.2] a [0.6] an 
article or a series of articles that now appear annually a thing called Trends 
in Office Design [0.8] and you'll see that in the handout i've listed [0.4] the 
last er five of them or the last four and say i'm expecting [0.2] Office Design 
Two-Thousand to come any minute [0.8] but in the nineteen-er -ninety-six er 
version of Trends in Office er Design or Office Trends [0.7] er Saxon er who is 
an architect talked about these four areas the changing nature of work [0.4] 
and the way buildings [0.5] locate [0.7] just think about that [0.3] how [0.3] 
er [0.3] patterns of work have changed and are changing [0.2] we talk these 
days about things like hotdesking [0.4] we talk about hotelling [0.7] how 
different that is [0.3] from the patterns of work in offices let's say in the 
nineteen-sixties and seventies and i'll 
illustrate that as we go through [1.5] there are issues to do with development 
and investment how how do we [0.2] go about procuring and producing office 
buildings [0.7] one of the things i want to do is to highlight different 
traditions [0.6] between the sort of traditio-, the er what i would call the 
Anglo-Saxon North American tradition of speculative office buildings [0.7] and 
a more European tradition of what one might call bespoke [0.2] or custom-built 
office buildings buildings that are commissioned by the occupiers [0.4] rather 
than just lenting renting any building that comes along [0.9] issues to do with 
how the urban system works where we locate our offices [0.4] er [0.3] what do 
planning policies have to say about office locations [0.6] er [0.2] you'll all 
know that we're trying to move away from greenfield developments [0.4] that 
implies more urban office developments [0.3] what does that mean for the form 
of offices [1.3] and then issues to do with the design of the workplace and 
construction [0.5] some of us recently [0.5] in Berlin were seeing 
different office buildings different standards of construction and many others 
of you will be going on [0.4] visits when hopefully you'll be looking at office 
buildings [0.4] so [0.3] there are different when we talk about [0.3] trends in 
office design and development [0.2] you need to keep these different sorts of 
areas [0.3] in mind it's not just simply the building [0.6] it's all the 
factors the circumstances which are surrounding the construction the 
development [0.2] the design [0.3] the use the occupation [0.2] the management 
of those buildings [1.3] so this is also a lecture where [0.4] for example 
those of you who have had some of Ginny Gibson's material on [0.4] er [0.6] 
property use management maintenance and so on [0.4] wi-, can begin to fi-, fit 
into what we've been talking about here facilities management [0.2] that's an 
aspect that comes into the equation [1.6] so [0.2] that's some of the er the 
ground i want to cover [0.5] now [0.3] i also want you to have in mind [0.5] as 
we go through today's session [0.7] this diagram you have in your handout [1.6] 
er [0.3] these different sorts of er [0.3] 
office buildings [2.1] i'll start by talking it's on the back of your handout 
[0.6] i'll be starting by talking about this traditional British speculative 
office building very much a product if you like [0.4] of the nineteen-fifties 
the sixties into the nineteen-seventies [0.4] a sort of slab it might be a a 
straight slab it might be [0.3] an L-shaped it might be T-shaped [0.2] but it 
has particular characteristics and i'll be talking about that [1.0] as we move 
into the nineteen-seventies and so on we get this [0.4] this type of office the 
open plan office [0.6] er called bürolandschaft in its in its particular form 
from Germany [0.3] er but deep floor space and i'll be talking about some of [0.
3] its influences and characteristics [1.0] we have other types of offices the 
the the the deeper plan floor plates that you find in places like Broadgate and 
Stockley Park i'll be illustrating that [1.0] we might be talking a little bit 
about the North American but we'll also particularly be talking about what on 
this diagram is called the [0.5] er new 
north European tradition [0.7] examples of office buildings which [0.5] are [0.
3] er [0.5] designed [0.2] with let's say [0.2] this is being a bit simplistic 
[0.3] with the user [0.6] rather than the developer [0.2] in mind [0.3] and 
i'll explain what i mean by that later on [0.3] an emphasis on [0.3] usability 
[0.4] adaptability from the point of view of who's occupying it a specific 
occupier [0.4] rather than the idea that you design an office building that [0.
4] any number of organizations can er [0.2] occupy [0.4] so [0.2] again as we 
go through the lecture apart from having in mind those different [0.2] areas of 
change if you like [0.4] just keep [0.3] your bearings on the fact that we're 
talking in essence about [0.5] different configurations of buildings different 
shapes different plan forms and so on [5.2] okay just [0.2] er back to that [0.
4] so [0.4] what we're seeing then is a situation in which er [0.5] you know we 
have we start [0.2] the period that we're looking at with a kind of fairly 
standard office building it'll be the slab and i'll explain that in a minute [1.
0] and if we move through the different decades [0.5] different [0.4] 
innovation [0.2] innovation takes it has an effect it i-, ha-, it impacts if 
you like on the design of office buildings [0.4] but not in a very [0.4] clear 
focused way [0.4] er just to give you an illustration of that [0.2] i will [0.
2] in the course of the lecture [0.8] when we're talking about the nineteen-
eighties refer you to a building designed by a man called Niels Torp [0.6] who 
was a Scandinavian architect who built the headquarters [0.3] for the er 
Scandinavian Airlines 
interesting building fascinating building [1.6] when you get to the nineteen-
nineties late nineteen-nineties you'll discover that [0.7] B-A [0.4] British 
Airports some of you might have seen it have been have had the new headquarters 
built [0.6] by the same architect [0.6] ten years later therefore we have the 
Scandinavian ideas [0.2] impacting on British office design [1.2] another 
illustration of that might be er [0.2] you'll discover it in the course of the 
lecture that some of the factors which are driving [0.4] the unusual sometimes 
configuration of [0.5] office buildings on the continent 
not always but sometimes [0.6] are to do with employment legislation [0.4] 
workers' councils employers' rights employees' rights [1.0] any consequence to 
us [0.6] well not much at the moment [0.6] but we're part of the European Union 
[0.6] we could be there in five or six years time some of the factors which 
have driven [0.4] the design of er European offices [0.3] might have an effect 
on us [0.4] so we've got this kind of diffusion of innovation of regulation of 
pressures and so on [1.7] i've already mentioned this question of custom and 
speculative office buildings that's another strand that's going to run through 
the lecture [1.0] it's said and it's a character a sort of a [0.3] i suppose a 
maybe it's a myth i don't know i think it's more than that [0.7] but in this 
country we own our houses and we rent our offices [1.0] the converse is very 
often said about Europe [0.7] they rent their houses and they own their office 
buildings [0.8] now there's a n-, there's a significant there's a consequence 
to that [0.3] it's not always true of course but it is a kind of trend [0.4] a 
generality [0.4] 
which influences if you like the way they approach er buildings [2.6] office 
development cycles another factor which you need just to have in the back of 
your mind [0.6] er [0.5] i've shown you a diagram along the way of [0.2] the 
development process [1.5] you'll remember this horrible diagram [0.6] you've 
got it in your handouts [0.7] remember it [0.4] groan groan [0.9] er [0.5] the 
point of that though is that [0.8] you know you're [0.5] if we're talking about 
offices that are being built over the decades they're going to be influenced by 
where they sit in the development cycle [1.7] in the nineteen- [0.2] eighties 
[0.8] a lot of office development was driven by [0.5] people [0.2] wanting to 
invest in offices [0.4] it was investment led [0.9] and therefore the financial 
institutions as i mentioned last week [0.6] had certain criteria that they 
applied to buildings that they bought as investments [0.6] and those criteria 
then impacted on the design of those buildings [1.4] you move to the nineteen-
nineties and we move to [0.4] what's said to be the customer is king a seller's 
market if you 
like [0.4] position where the tenant prospective tenant is very er [0.2] er 
dominant [1.2] we begin to find that those [0.2] criteria which the 
institutions applied [0.3] are taking a back seat [0.4] er and they're not 
playing such an important role [0.3] because [0.3] the cycle's moved on [0.3] 
different factors are affecting [0.2] er the [0.7] situation [1.1] but again 
set as i said [0.4] changing market conditions [0.2] but we've got a [0.2] 
essentially a fixed stock [1.1] of course we're building new offices all the 
time [0.6] but institutions are left holding offices [0.5] that they bought 
they invested in [0.3] from the nineties from the eighties [0.4] from the 
seventies sometimes from the sixties [0.4] what do they do with those buildings 
how adaptable are they [0.5] how easily can you change them to meet the new 
requirements [0.7] so that's the kind of context i think i want you to have er 
in the back of your mind [0.5] er as we go through er the lecture today [1.9] 
and as i say we're going to be [1.0] spending a lot of time with the lights 
down low [0.6] and er [1.2] slides er showing [2.9] okay [0.9] nineteen-sixties 
and as it says on the handout [0.3] 
in brackets [0.6] er [0.5] also the nineteen- [2.4] eighties let's just [0.5] 
let's try that [0.8] okay [2.5] before we get there [2.0] remember that slide 
[1.2] right at the end of the lecture [0.5] we'll come back to that slide but 
there'll be an addition [1.3] and remember that first quote office buildings 
are one of the great icons of the twentieth century [0.6] this is downtown [0.
3] Dallas [3.5] downtown Toronto [0.3] yeah just think about the the dominance 
that office buildings play on the townscape [1.1] and also instead of just 
thinking about those as forms [0.6] think about [0.4] what's going on in those 
buildings what's giving rise to that form [0.3] why are many of them downtown 
Toronto downtown Dallas so tall [0.4] er think about the configuration the 
basic configuration of the buildings [0.5] er they they fatten out well that's 
a product of light and planning requirements and so on but essentially they're 
er they're tall thin buildings [2.1] that is downtown City of London [0.8] er 
doesn't have quite the same er [0.7] visual image Saint Paul's is just off to 
the right and it's a sho-, a 
shot that you can see if you take a telescope from Parliament Hill Fields but 
it's one of the classic shots nevertheless of London [0.4] so [0.3] make no 
mistake about it office buildings have a huge impact socially [0.3] visually 
physically [0.3] economically [0.3] o-, on er the form and our working of our 
cities [2.4] we're talking about office buildings from a historical perspective 
of course we wouldn't just suddenly start inventing offices in the er nineteen-
er -seventies [0.7] er this is one of the first if not the first office 
building [0.4] er in er London [0.7] and it's at the top end of Lower Regent 
Street it was a fire insurance office [0.4] er constructed in the er n-, late 
er nineteenth sorry late eighteenth early nineteenth century [1.6] er here's er 
a famous [2.6] er see if we can focus that a little bit better [1.0] a famous 
building no longer there [0.2] these are offices from the Victorian period this 
is the last remaining was the last remaining mercantile building [0.4] office 
building in the City of London [0.5] Mansion House 
demolished rebuilt er by er Palumbo [0.5] and colleagues er in the nineteen-
nineties [1.2] but again Victorian offices [1.7] Lutyens this building has now 
been refurbished interesting question [0.4] turn of the century building now 
occupied as B-P headquarters [0.5] er in Finsbury Square [0.5] er built as i 
say round about nineteen-hundred [0.8] a monumental building [0.2] it says 
something about the importance and prestige which was attached to [0.6] office 
headquarters at that sta-, early part of the century [2.5] Shell Shell 
headsquarters building [0.3] on the South Bank [0.3] next to the royal er f-, 
Royal Festival Hall [0.8] er London Eye is just about here [0.6] er [0.7] 
office buildings of the nineteen-fifties again corporate buildings er purpose-
designed to occup-, for Shell to occupy as their headquarters [1.1] we keep on 
moving you know w-, we get into the nineteen-sixties [0.5] characteristic 
building here [0.2] this is New Zealand House [0.3] er just off les-, er 
Trafalgar Square and er Haymarket [0.4] and we have [0.2] the podium [0.7] the 
the low broad floor f-, 
floor plates on the lower floors and then a tower rising up above that [0.4] 
these are just [0.3] illustrations if you like of office buildings in this 
country [1.4] anybody recognize that [0.8] Natwest Tower [0.2] headquarters of 
National Westminster Bank [1.0] but that's interesting [0.2] that building was 
damaged by the I-R-A bomb [0.7] Natwest no longer occupy it [0.2] very recently 
very recently it's been refurbished it's now called i believe Tower Forty-Two 
[0.7] er and isn't just offices but includes social facilities c-, cafes 
restaurants and so on for the sort of offices i believe it may be being let out 
as [0.4] managed office suites [0.4] and right at the end of the lecture i'll 
be coming on to that and talking about outfits like Regus which i guess some of 
you have heard [0.3] who specialize [0.4] in [0.3] taking office buildings [0.
4] and using them and er letting them out [0.3] in in small areas [0.4] 
providing er er common facilities [0.5] but [0.2] very characteristic of 
attitudes towards office buildings in the nineteen-er - [0.6] seventies [0.7] 
Lloyds of London [0.2] er [0.2] another [0.4] image [0.6] er 
which i'm going to refer to and come back to [0.6] what's interesting about 
this building is [0.9] all the services on the outside [0.9] you see this 
building [0.4] perhaps just as an office building [1.2] but what are the 
implications if you pull out all the circulation which you normally find in a 
building [0.2] and put it on the edge [0.5] what does that do for [0.2] the 
building its use its efficiency its net to gross and so on [0.5] so [0.2] i've 
got to start making you look at the buildings in a rather different way i guess 
and think about them in a different way [0.6] Broadgate [0.3] what does that 
have to tell us a lot of lessons but amongst the lessons you might learn from 
Broadgate sorry not Broadgate er [0.9] Isle of er Docklands Canary Wharf [0.6] 
is how these buildings were constructed [1.6] and the fact that those facades 
can be taken off [0.5] and the buildings can be refronted with relative ease [0.
7] we'll talk about that during the course of the lecture [1.4] and then [0.2] 
moving away from the urban offices which are my essential focus [0.3] we come 
to office 
developments like [0.3] er Stockley Park [1.0] er which [0.3] there obviously 
is a connection i want to explain what that connection is in terms of their 
layout and organization [2.0] and buildings like this which are er designed the 
headquarters of what was then the C-E-G-B [0.2] er in Bristol [0.7] er designed 
by Ove Arup and Partners who i mentioned last week to you [0.5] er but [0.3] 
some very significant lessons in the design of this essentially suburban office 
building [0.3] feeding back through to the design of [0.4] er er urban offices 
[0.7] so [0.3] in the back of your mind i want you to ha-, realize that offices 
are not just offices [0.3] there are all sorts of different office buildings 
different ages [0.5] different factors have influenced their design they have 
different characteristics [0.3] they are more or less adaptable to change [0.5] 
they reflect the kind of organization [0.5] that [0.5] was [0.4] prevalent [0.
2] when those office buildings were conceived [0.6] and if we change the 
patterns of work [0.5] work is changing how we work how many people work and so 
on [0.4] in a building [0.4] then 
those buildings themselves have to adapt [0.2] change [0.4] or they become 
redundant [2.1] okay so let's er talk about our nineteen-sixties' [1.3] i refer 
the to this as what i call the bargain basement approach to office design [1.2] 
you'll remember that last week i talked about the good enough approach the idea 
that why build anything to a higher standard when you have a market [0.4] that 
will take the building at [0.3] the lower standard which perhaps takes less e-, 
less effort [0.4] er and so on [0.8] well that's kind of characteristic of the 
nineteen-sixties' and nineteen-seventies' design of office building [0.8] er [0.
9] it was a building boom period of building boom [0.8] 
the office buildings we had of this period were essentially cellular office 
buildings [0.6] er [0.3] single rooms [0.2] easily provided providing for 
corridors [0.4] er along [0.3] er [0.6] along their floor plate i don't know 
whether you can see this terribly clearly but here we have an L-shaped building 
[1.0] you can see that we've got glazing on both sides we have a corridor 
running down the middle [0.4] er as it happens where the two buildings connect 
we've got service courts lift courts and so on [0.6] here's a straight building 
[0.3] er [0.5] essentially a s-, a slab in which the [0.3] er let me just find 
my [0.7] pen [2.7] the er the core of the building is at one end and the escape 
staircase is at the other [0.9] now [0.2] if you were to study this building in 
some detail you would discover for example that characteristically [0.5] it is 
about [0.3] er thirteen metres side to side [1.3] course we didn't talk about 
metres then we talked in imperial terms it was about forty to forty-five feet 
either side [0.8] er there was a 
set sort of column spacing [0.3] the windows were very commonly round about 
four feet the mullions [0.4] one to another [0.9] four four to five feet 
something like that [0.5] er [0.3] and [0.8] net to gross of a building like 
this in other words the amount of floor space that was available to let [0.7] 
as against the amount the gross floor area of the building [0.3] was often 
round about seventy per cent [0.3] so [0.3] you had a building like this and 
seventy perhaps a little bit more per cent of the floor space was available to 
let [0.4] and therefore you could attach the rental value to that and 
capitalize it and you would come up with the [0.4] value of the building [2.0] 
that illustrates the layout very well again [0.5] idea of a central corridor 
escape staircase [0.4] er core at this end [0.4] and we've got a building which 
can be let into these sort of cellular offices [0.9] er [0.4] that er what does 
that do it means you've got privacy privacy to work [0.7] er [0.4] it's a kind 
of time-honoured way of [0.2] controlling how you [0.3] ventilate these sorts 
of buildings [0.5] and how you light these 
buildings [0.4] because [0.2] what was driving the width of the building from 
that side to that side was essentially [0.8] the [0.2] depth natural light 
would penetrate [0.2] the offices [0.4] at the sort of latitude we're at [0.9] 
and also the amount of ventilation that you could get through just [0.3] er 
opening a window [0.2] these are not [0.5] air-conditioned buildings [0.7] 
these are essentially natural bu-, naturally lit buildings [0.5] and they are 
essentially [0.3] er sorry naturally ventilated buildings and they are 
essentially naturally lit buildings [0.3] of course there was lighting but you 
just switch the lights on when the light [0.6] went down you know w-, when it 
was getting dark [1.3] er conventional floor plans wasteful if sublet [0.9] why 
was it wasteful if sublet because you had to create more corridor space and the 
net to gross began to go down [0.6] and you can see it's very basic we've got a 
floor slab we've got columns we've got a ceiling [0.4] we've got lights hanging 
from the ceiling [0.4] kind of reminds you of FURS doesn't it [0.9] that's the 
FURS building [0.4] the 
essence of it [0.8] no suspended er floor no s-, no raised floor no suspended 
ceiling [0.4] er [0.2] plugs and sockets well there might be a few dotted 
around the edge [0.3] er but [0.2] no more than that [3.2] and those were the 
sorts of er devices that you got up to to sort of try and and seg-, segment the 
office to break it up you can see that the partitions which aren't full height 
or they might be glazed at the extra height [0.5] running into the mullions [0.
5] people working in rather cramped conditions [1.2] so [0.2] that sort of was 
the characteristic if you like of nineteen-sixties' er offices [1.0] now just 
think about it though [0.6] does everybody need a cellular office [0.9] if they 
don't need a cellular office [0.5] isn't this really very difficult doesn't it 
look very cramped [0.6] giving those people in any more than one o-, one person 
per office you know if you imagine you went into [0.3] my room in FURS [0.4] 
and you found two or three people in there [0.3] it would seem very 
claustrophobic and and crowded [0.8] so it [0.2] it was wasteful of space [0.3] 
er [0.4] the 
partitions would be expensive to move if you wanted to restructure the building 
all sorts of issues like that [0.8] er [0.4] but essentially the design of the 
building was being [0.4] fixed by [0.5] a question of cost and economy [0.3] it 
was an easy building to construct to design [0.3] and hopefully to let and that 
was good for the developer [2.3] finally just to er put it [0.2] m-, [0.2] make 
a point which we're going to be coming back to later on [0.3] just think about 
things like solar gain [0.8] you know again think about FURS [0.2] you know you 
hear the [0.6] the rain on the roof [0.5] er when the sun comes in [0.3] most 
of the heat gets transferred into the buildings the rooms heat up [0.3] there's 
no ventilation it gets pretty unpleasant [0.4] er [0.2] you know quite a lot 
quite a lot of problems with this kind of er building [3.4] nevertheless there 
are some fine examples of buildings like that [1.4] buildings which had in 
their own way a huge influence on the kinds of buildings that we were producing 
[0.7] this is er the building known as the Seagram S-E-A-G-R-A-M building [0.3] 
in New 
York [0.7] designed by er the modernist modern movement architect Mies van der 
Rohe [0.5] er and is a sort of absolute classic of i-, of its time [0.2] huge 
slab office building [0.4] with a small er tail er running back [0.9] and we 
have our own versions of that [0.2] Centrepoint it has a curve [0.4] but 
essentially [0.3] it's [0.3] it's it's a sort of er New York if you like high-
rise applied to a U-K situtation [1.8] but again just one more problem [0.6] 
and this is a problem with Centrepoint [0.5] the floor plates are very small [1.
5] lot of floor space [0.4] but each floor plate has relatively little area [1.
0] that actually turned to be a very major factor in the refurbishment of 
Natwest Tower [0.7] er that its floor plates were very small for [0.3] modern 
usage [0.9] the kinds of space that occupiers will tend to want to occupy [0.2] 
now [0.6] nevertheless i mean we had our buildings like that ye-, can i can 
show many other examples [0.4] i-, in London and elsewhere namex's got them not 
as elegant as er [0.4] Centrepoint which is now a listed building [0.4] but a 
product of the 
nineteen-sixties' approach to the design of offices [2.3] well [0.8] there was 
an alternative approach to what i would call the slab office building [2.5] it 
became known [0.2] in its developed form as [0.6] bürolandschaft offices [1.0] 
but essentially what it is it's the idea of a pool [1.3] think about the the 
the the archetypal image of a typing pool [1.2] in which there are lots and 
lots of people working in ordered desks arranged formally [0.4] in a large open 
space [2.0] this is the the Larkin building nineteen-twenty-four [0.4] er which 
was er a mail order company in the United States [0.4] i believe [0.4] er and 
[0.8] all the desks were laid out in this very formal way [0.4] and if you 
really were to study this thing you'll find that you've got a-, all the typists 
running down the middle and they're servicing [0.4] er a number of people on 
either side and there seems to be some supervisors [0.5] watching what's 
happening [0.6] all all good sort of keep people in their place kind of 
situation [0.5] er [0.3] and you can imagine that there are certain 
advantages of this sort of office building [0.7] er [0.2] one of which is it's 
clearly very well suited [0.2] to routine tasks [0.9] you can supervise [0.4] 
very easily [0.2] you can keep an eye on what everybody's doing [0.7] somebody 
goes along to is away from their desk too long for er a cup of tea [0.6] er or 
to go to the toilet you can soon sort of record what's happening [1.4] any of 
you worked in er [0.6] telecentre sales [0.2] place [1.4] just think about the 
parallels you know when your calls are being monitored and if you're away for 
too long if you don't answer too many calls somebody starts ringing you up and 
saying [0.4] hang on you haven't answered too many does that happen [0.5] 
sf1143: [0.4] 
nm1141: yeah [0.2] 
sf1143: 
nm1141: not going to not going to say but i mean [0.6] you can begin to see the 
parallels here we here we have an organization that is doing repetitive tasks 
[0.4] er it's got a hierarchical organization [0.3] it wants to keep close 
control over [0.2] what its people are doing [0.5] er it's pretty easy to make 
change [0.2] as it happens not in 
er the Larkin building because all the desks were fitted down and so on but 
that's by the by [0.2] the principle is there [0.5] er [0.3] but the 
disadvantage is you can see it's the kind of classroom effect [0.8] er [0.3] er 
[0.2] easily to be distracted [0.4] you know if somebody if something unusual 
happens perhaps when the tea trolley does come down here [0.4] all eyes away 
from the desk to the tea trolley and you think whether you going to have a Mars 
bar or w-, what you're going to do is it going to be coffee today or is there 
some nice s-, soft drink [0.6] er and so on [0.4] er [0.6] there other issues 
like [0.6] usually it's difficult to have any sort of outward expression of 
your status [1.1] if you're in an organization that is hierarchical [0.3] not 
that we are there much now but that certainly was the case [0.4] how do you 
express the status of different people [0.5] the joke used to be in the Civil 
Service you know that the [0.3] the junior had one drawer [0.2] next person up 
had two drawers the next person up had drawers on both sides the next person 
had a carpet on the floor [0.5] and so on [0.2] very difficult er to have that 
sort of expression of status if that's 
what you're about [1.0] and also there's a lack of control [0.5] and i'll come 
back to this issue later on in the lectures you can't alter your environment 
readily [1.4] er because you can't open the windows you know you can't sort of 
readily [0.4] er stick up posters of your holiday [0.5] er destinations and so 
on because it's you know very much er shared space [0.7] now [0.6] in the 
nineteen-er - [0.3] er -seventies and nineteen-sixties [0.4] some er German 
space planners er set up this team and created what was ca-, became called as 
the bürolandschaft offices you've had the background [0.8] which was this idea 
of essentially much deeper floor plates [0.8] forget about this [0.5] er 
thirteen metres fourteen metres side to side [0.3] here we're talking about 
perhaps thirty metres perhaps forty metres [0.4] from building to building [1.
2] now how could they do it [0.9] well because of course technology had moved 
on the kinds of things that you couldn't do in the nineteen-sixties [0.5] 
permanent [0.2] artificial lighting [0.6] air conditioning [0.2] the technology 
[0.2] wasn't there i'm sorry 
going further back than the sixties [0.5] er [0.3] of course became more 
commonplace in the in the sixties and into the seventies [0.4] so you could 
solve the problems of handling ventilating lighting these deep floor plates [0.
4] and then you could start packing people in [0.8] and you could [0.4] in the 
conventional way you'd have packed them in in a formal sense [0.5] but the key 
to bürolandschaft was [0.3] that you created the landscaped office which is 
what bürolandschaft means [0.3] the landscaped office [0.4] in which you can 
[0.2] lay out the desks in a more informal irregular way [0.5] and [0.2] create 
some kind of landscaping er between them you can create sort of zones and areas 
of activity and specializations you could perhaps have some cellular offices [0.
3] perhaps around the perimeter which would allow for those staff that felt 
their [0.8] er status depended on it [0.5] and you could create some kind of 
privacy you could have areas for [0.4] er you know er staff assessment [0.2] 
which weren't going to be out in the open [0.7] and it was a sort of 
compromise [1.3] and this is er an illustration of that sort of thing laid out 
in the ful-, Ford building in Cologne [1.0] what of course you also got in this 
time was [0.6] furniture manufacturers providers of office furniture beginning 
to respond to [0.4] the possibilities and creating [0.6] interlocking [0.2] 
modular furniture [0.3] which you could sort of create and er different 
organizational areas and so on [2.9] you'll notice here [0.2] and i'll come 
back to that [0.6] there are not too many cables are there [1.4] we're still in 
an era when the typewriter ruled okay [0.3] you had a desk you didn't have a 
computer you had a typewriter you didn't have a printer [0.6] the telephone was 
a very basic telephone system [0.6] so the problems which we come on with later 
on hadn't really begun to hit [0.2] this sort of office [2.4] that is er the [0.
3] headquarters of er [0.9] a district council in the north-east which for the 
moment i've forgotten [0.5] it'll come back to me [0.5] er this this was their 
open-plan office [0.4] er and you can see the kind of pattern that i've been 
talking about again not many sign of cables you won't find many computers if 
any computers [0.5] on here [0.4] er fairly generous space provision [0.7] 
typical if you like open-plan bürolandschaft office of this period [1.8] 
but there are problems [1.3] individual control problems of noise lack of 
privacy and so on [1.4] now [0.9] one of the [0.6] seminal office schemes [0.2] 
er of this period [1.2] is [0.3] this development which i've referred you to on 
the handout [0.5] as being by a man called Herman Hertzberger [1.4] er [0.3] 
known as the Centraal Beheer [0.8] er outside er [0.2] Amsterdam as i recall [1.
6] and this was [0.4] what we've done now is to move from [0.5] that North 
American [0.7] Anglo-Saxon tradition of very efficient office space [0.6] 
office space that's designed to maximize the net to gross and the net to gross 
of open-plan offices [0.4] moves up from let's say [0.5] seventy per cent to 
perhaps eighty per cent [0.6] and suddenly of course [0.2] eyes light up eighty 
per cent more rent capitalize that and more value for the same cost of 
construction good move [0.3] move for develop that sort of thing [0.8] but just 
move across to [0.3] north Europe [1.1] er mainland Europe [0.6] with a 
different culture [0.5] which is picking up on this idea of a bürolandschaft 
but then also thinking about some of the problems associated with it like 
privacy like [0.4] er lack of sort of autonomy [0.4] er homogeneous er grouping 
of people and so on [1.3] and what you had here with Centraal Beheer in er 
Apeldoorn [0.4] er was [0.6] if you like the high point [0.4] of [0.2] what was 
in fact [0.6] open-plan bürofl-, bürolandschaft offices [0.7] but [0.2] 
adapted to a very much a sort of er a more er employee focused approach [1.0] 
this outfit was a cooperative insurance company [1.1] and they wanted to create 
a headquarters for their staff [0.5] they wanted it to be a sort of an 
egalitarian kind of place where people we-, felt they were valued [0.6] and 
they crea-, and and their architect er Herman Hertzberger created this scheme 
[0.6] and you can just see the [0.2] complexity if if you like of the floor 
plan [0.7] you've got lots and lots of [0.2] you've got quite a deep floor plan 
[0.8] and lots and lots of cells [1.2] 
created by linked by corridors and space [0.4] and it's not just a two-
dimensional [0.5] fragmentation if you like of work areas [1.6] it's also a 
vertical fragmentation of work areas with views out into this sort of central 
lit [0.5] area atrium if you like [0.4] you can see a cafe a s-, or sitting 
areas here [0.3] that's people having coffee communal meeting areas and so on 
[1.0] so that's [0.3] if you like [0.3] the the north European spin being put 
on [0.3] to this idea of open-plan o-, office floor space [0.6] now [1.0] in 
the reading you ha-, i hope you'll do you'll come across this scheme without 
any doubt at all it had a huge [0.6] er if you like impact on architects and 
designers [0.7] but none i have to say on property developers there never was a 
scheme [0.3] i-, in the U-K and so far as i know in the U-S which kind of 
picked up on these things [0.3] but some of the ideas you see here [0.7] we'll 
revisit [0.5] those of you who've ever seen the Ark [0.8] that building as you 
approach London on the M-four [0.6] er designed by the English architect Ralph 
Erskine but for a 
Scandinavian property developer [0.5] you'll find some of this imagery sorry [0.
2] imagery appearing back in that nineteen-eighties' office building [2.5] and 
that's just another shot as you look down and through er the the building [0.5] 
so you can imagine that you know you've got [0.6] working groups [0.7] in what 
is essentially a deep plan office space [0.3] but none of that [0.3] blandness 
none of that sterility none of that [0.4] er lack of personality or personal 
space which you get with the standard open-plan office [3.9] that was a later 
scheme done by Herman Hertzberger the Ministry of er Social and s-, [1.2] 
Social Services [0.2] i-, in er in The Hague [0.5] er [0.2] in which some of 
those ideas were being carried through [0.4] er but not with the er the sort of 
success and the intimacy and the attractiveness that you saw with the Centraal 
Beheer scheme [3.2] okay [0.2] and that's The Hague as well [0.4] right [1.1] 
now [0.6] there were some advantages of this sort of office development it er 
[0.2] one of the things that i want to think about as we go through this er 
talk is not 
just to think about the office building [1.0] but also think about its impact 
on [0.2] the form and shape of cities [1.3] when i showed you those slides of 
[0.2] New York [0.9] of Toronto [0.3] and many other cities you saw lots of 
skyscrapers [0.7] didn't you [1.2] and that [0.3] why did they have to go high 
well there are various reasons some of them to do with planning [0.6] but one 
of the main ones was that if your building can only be [0.4] let's say thirteen 
fourteen maybe at extreme twenty metres deep [0.8] and you've got a lot of 
floor space you've got to go up [1.3] if on the other hand you can spread your 
floor space [0.9] suddenly the drive to go high isn't there any more [0.8] you 
can you can have a lot of floor space and you can spread it over a site [0.5] 
and you don't have to have the same number of lifts things can get a little bit 
easier [1.2] and therefore as you go into the nineteen-seventies you begin to 
see even in this country [0.5] architects and developers exploiting the 
posibility to have high volumes of floor space but with deeper floor 
plans [0.9] this scheme [0.5] er is was er developed by the church 
commissioners [0.2] it's in Victoria Street in central London [0.7] er [0.2] 
and essentially the floor spl-, floor pl-, er space is spread down a long 
length of Victoria Street we're heading towards [0.3] Parliament Square [0.4] 
and down that way Victoria Station is behind us [1.9] just look at the floor 
plan [0.7] this is the development [1.8] and you can see this is a far cry from 
the slab [0.6] office floor plan [1.5] it has some light wells in the middle [0.
9] and it zigs in and out and gets really quite deep and then we get further 
light wells here and underneath this of course [0.3] suddenly because we've got 
a deep floor plate we can put shopping [0.5] so you've got er [0.2] department 
stores [0.3] and shops unit shops underneath this development [1.1] and if you 
like the most memorable thing about this scheme [0.2] is [0.3] that's 
Westminster Cathedral [0.5] which until this was developed in the nineteen-
seventies had been hidden [1.3] and then suddenly as a result of [0.3] er 
planning and development and so on [0.4] it 
was possible to put the floor space [0.2] build it up on either side and you 
suddenly get this [0.2] dramatic image if you like of [0.4] er the Westminster 
Cathedral and and this architecture [0.5] so [0.7] have in the back of your 
mind that that when you're d-, thinking about the design of offices [0.2] how 
they're designed affects the kind of environment you can achieve [0.5] that can 
be applied to Broadgate [0.4] come on and talk about Broadgate Broadgate would 
not have been possible [0.3] had you been designing with slab office buildings 
[3.7] right [2.7] what do we see as we go into the er nineteen- [0.2] er - [0.
2] eighties [3.3] i've called this [1.8] the expansive decade [4.8] this was 
this was Thatcher the economy was booming [0.8] all sorts of things er seemed 
possible [0.9] er [0.2] we had a P-C revolution [1.4] that's the kind of 
situation [0.2] which was beginning to occur [0.5] once you introduce P-Cs and 
printers and so on then you have telephones and we had P-B-X telephone systems 
[0.3] suddenly we've got a lot more cables for telephones [0.6] and suddenly 
people wanted more desk space [0.7] not 
just better provision for cables actually needed more desk space how are we 
going to provide for that 'cause computers were not small [0.5] beasts in those 
days [1.3] computers [0.2] tended to get hot [1.4] you know if we had a problem 
with natural ventilation natural light [0.2] in [0.2] nineteen-sixties' office 
buildings seventies' office buildings you then add the heat that was coming off 
these early computers [0.4] you know you began to need more air conditioning or 
or air conditioning full stop [1.8] er [0.8] so there were there were searches 
if you like to try and er find ways of accommodating these new er [0.2] 
requirements [2.2] seems funny seeing this the city office of today and the 
office of tomorrow and that was twenty years ago [2.9] and the consequence of 
that is that [0.2] suddenly from a from a an office building where if you think 
about the first example you had a slab you had the lighting hanging from the 
ceiling and then you had a floor [0.8] we suddenly find we need much more space 
we've got to raise the floor [1.0] we've got to raise the 
floor perhaps partly for heating and ventilation [0.6] but also for cabling [1.
5] we've got to drop the ceiling [1.1] because the lighting has to be better 
than just a bit of bolt on ceiling [0.3] think about this [0.7] you know the 
lighting is going to be much more significant it's going to be much more 
effective we've got to cope with the heat it generates we've got some air 
conditioning coming into this lecture theatre not that we felt it last week [0.
4] so we opened the fire doors [1.1] what's the implications of that [0.2] 
coping with this new technology for office buildings [1.4] could the nineteen-
sixties' building have coped with it [1.6] if not why not [4.7] what was a 
typical floor to floor height of a nineteen-sixties' building [2.0] floor to 
floor here [0.3] might be something like three-point-six three-point-seven 
metres [1.0] floor to floor in a nineteen-sixties' building [0.7] maybe er two-
point-nine [0.6] maybe three [0.4] often not [0.8] in order to accommodate all 
that space you needed [0.7] a er a higher [0.2] building higher floor to floor 
[0.5] and many nineteen-sixties' and 
seventies' buildings simply couldn't accommodate this er these sorts of 
requirements [1.4] so we've got new technology coming in [0.4] and you see that 
illustrated here here here is a here is a building that could be converted [0.
5] the building prior to modernization [0.8] windows [0.4] upstand [0.2] slab 
floor [0.4] ceiling suspended lighting [0.7] but after modernization [0.3] you 
can put in the suspended ceiling you can raise the floor [0.3] if you've got 
the headroom if you in the first instance many cases the buildings didn't have 
that sort of space [2.6] now i don't know whether you can see this er slide too 
well [0.7] but we'll try and i'll try and explain it [3.4] essentially what 
we're looking at is the relationship [0.7] between [0.7] the costs of 
constructing the building [1.3] and its rent value at the beginning [1.0] 
showing in green [1.1] and then periodically the cost of improving it this says 
nineteen-sixties here [0.5] in this example the building was refurbished in the 
nineteen-seventies [1.0] its basic costs has been indexed up [1.3] then you've 
added the costs of refurbishment [1.9] 
and then you've got some additional costs [1.2] and what you've got then is the 
rental curve had the building not been refurbished [2.1] indexed [0.5] and then 
the value [0.3] if you carry out a refurbishment there are obviously cycles in 
this is the nineteen-seventies' crash [0.5] rental values increasing [0.7] and 
what you can see here is the incentive if you like shown and again [0.4] er 
nineteen-eighties refurbishment further refurbishment is that right nineteen-
seventy-nine [2.7] just got to get my mind round that hold on [0.7] nineteen-
seventy-nine [2.0] 
refurbishment [0.3] for rent [0.6] this is where the costs are going that's 
right that's the that's the original cost indexed out [0.4] added up [0.8] 
sorry i've i've got it that's nineteen-seventy [0.3] nineteen-sixty nineteen-
seventy nineteen-eighty [0.3] so you've got different stages of refurbishment 
[0.4] indexing the cost of construction up [0.4] but then adding costs of 
refurbishment and as you can go through you can see the drive the incentive is 
if you can to refurbish the building [0.4] because it's re-, increasing the 
rental value above [0.3] the increase that you get due to the costs of [0.4] er 
refurbishment [1.2] so the the drive is through this period of the nineteen-er -
eighties is to refurbish office buildings [0.4] if you can [1.2] anybody 
recognize that building [2.1] that's the road down to Cemetery Junction that's 
the road up to Eldon Square this used to be the headquarters in namex of 
Scottish 
Life [0.5] it was the subject of major refurbishment including new fenestration 
[0.4] in about nineteen-eighty [2.9] you might [0.3] some of you recognize this 
building [1.0] it's on the M-four [0.4] as you approach London [0.6] er after 
Heathrow [1.1] you see this building i think it's called something like Access-
Four now [0.6] this was a typical [0.5] office slab [0.8] this was [0.3] you 
used to see all the exposed er windows floor plates running all the way through 
this building [0.7] and then in the nineteen mid-nineteen-eighties it was 
completely refurbished [0.7] and refronted re-elevated to give a new image [0.
6] this was a building that could be adapted and converted in that way [1.3] 
this is another building [0.9] which [0.7] er was a slab office buildings of 
the nineteen-sixties type which had the right configuration floor to floor for 
a complete [0.2] refurbishment [0.2] and [0.3] a new elevation inserted on it 
[0.5] in a in the [0.2] actually the late nineteen-eighties this is in Covent 
Garden [0.3] in the centre of London [3.8] what about that building [0.8] any 
of you know that building [3.1] King's 
Point [0.8] at the end of King's Road in namex [0.8] er [1.0] used to be where 
the County Planning office had its headquarters when i first came here [0.9] 
it's a building which has been refurbished [0.5] but never successfully [0.4] 
it's never properly let they tried to create a new entrance on to the side road 
which fronts on to what's now Sapphire Plaza [0.6] er [0.4] but it's never 
successfully er let its floor plates are too small they could never put in air 
conditioning [0.5] it's always been a compromise [0.4] this is a building which 
at some stage [0.4] will be redeveloped why don't you think that building 
though [0.2] has been redeveloped [1.9] everything should tell you that 
building ought to be redeveloped [1.5] 
sm1144: [0.8] 
nm1141: [laughter] [0.5] no but i i do make a joke about that sometimes in 
another context no [0.6] what's underneath that building [0.7] 
sm1145: a shop [0.3] 
nm1141: Kwik Fit [0.8] Kwik Fit Auto [0.2] have a long lease [1.0] and they're 
driving what happens on that site [0.5] they you can't there's not enough value 
in it [0.3] to buy out Kwik Fit 
and their lease [0.6] to redevelop that building [0.4] but everything else 
about that office building w-, [0.2] it has car parking and there but beneath 
that you've got a very large podium which has Kwik Fit [0.4] and some car 
parking [0.4] everything else about that building should have led to it being 
redeveloped [2.3] so [0.2] we've got a situation if you like in which [0.3] er 
the nineteen-eighties is leading to [0.8] er new requirements higher f-, higher 
[0.4] floor to floor heights new technology more air conditioning [0.3] better 
ventilation and so on [0.6] er [0.4] you either built new [0.4] or you tried to 
refurbish [0.3] or if you couldn't refurbish er you redeveloped [0.6] now [0.5] 
i make it just seven minutes to er twelve [0.6] i think the tape wants a break 
[0.5] er you want a break [0.6] so can i suggest please that we come back here 
promptly i mean promptly we're a bit slow last week [0.3] at ten past twelve 
got a quarter of an hour break 
nm1141: 
let's er let's make a start [8.8] can we er [0.2] can we have shh [0.5] right 
[1.0] okay we we're still in the nineteen-eighties [0.4] er and we've got this 
new technology coming in we've got more air conditioning [0.3] er you know [0.
2] deeper some some extent deeper floor plates of offices what we've also got 
[0.5] is er organizations thinking and reflecting er more about [0.4] er the 
design of er their office buildings i just want to [0.5] quickly [1.1] kind of 
give you a reminder [2.8] that we've er [4.9] you know we've been talk-, we've 
talked about that traditional British speculative office we've talked about 
bürolandschaft [0.4] we've looked at er Herman Hertzberger's derivative of 
that building [0.5] which was very deep floor plate but we're trying to bring 
in individuality into it [0.5] what want to begin to move into is this sort of 
area it's called here the new Broadgate type of office [0.3] which i'll explain 
er shortly [0.5] but it's [0.3] essentially trying to find a compromise if you 
like between the deep floor plates of the bürolandschaft [0.4] and the 
advantages if you like of the [0.4] er the shallower floor 
plates [0.4] at the same time marrying that with the technological 
possibilities of air conditioning of of permanent er lighting and so on [1.6] 
and [0.7] what you also see at this period is the realization and i touched on 
this last week [0.6] do you remember that i said you know the the architects 
that were employed [0.4] to do er developments in the nineteen-sixties were 
those that really weren't necessarily the best architects [0.3] but the ones 
who could get their way through the planning system and could get the best plot 
ratios and floor space and so on [0.7] what you see coming into the er nineteen-
[0.5] er -eighties i'm going to have just [0.3] backtrack 'cause i think i've 
missed a slide here [0.8] yeah [1.2] is [0.5] a a a much [0.6] a greater 
emphasis on beginning to reflect if you like [0.4] on the kinds of 
organizations that were going to occupy buildings we've we've we've got this [0.
3] realization that [0.4] you know [0.2] that it's not just office space it's 
not just a standard [0.3] kind of occupier [0.4] we need to be more [0.2] er 
circumspect you've got this 
diagram in your handout [1.2] and so you find f-, that er [0.9] a a number of 
er leading edge developers and occupiers began to commission research [0.3] 
looking into things like [0.2] the nature of work the nature of change [0.6] 
and there were two studies done one in nineteen-eighty and one in eighty-four 
known as the Orbit studies [0.6] er which were re-, er produced i believe er by 
D-E-G-W i won't give you Duffy Eley Worthing-, Gifford and Worthington forget 
about that they're known as D-E-G-W [0.7] er [0.2] a firm of [0.3] architects 
who specialized in space planning [0.2] sp-, space [0.6] I-E laying out 
buildings [0.4] with a particular emphasis on offices [0.7] and you will come 
across these names the D is Duffy Frank Duffy [0.4] and a number of the 
references you've got are by Duffy [0.8] and the W is Worthington John 
Worthington [0.6] it's an outfit and those individuals have done more [0.3] 
reflecting if you like on [0.3] organizational change and patterns of work 
change than any other [1.4] this is comes from the second Orbit report in 
nineteen-er -eighty-four [0.5] and 
you can see them beginning to reflect on the kinds of organizations [0.4] and 
and perhaps their requirements [0.4] they were saying work could be broken into 
a continuum between [0.3] non-routine and routine [1.0] er and the kind of 
organization the kind of change that it was undergoing could be [0.2] ranked on 
a continuum between low change and high change [0.8] so you get [0.3] something 
like a a corporate back office let's say of a bank [0.2] routine work [0.2] low 
change [0.8] er academic offices [0.3] er non-routine [0.5] low change i'm not 
sure that i'd agree about that come year two-thousand but nineteen-er -eighties 
that would be true [0.6] you've got high tech firms [0.3] er the new [0.5] some 
rise industries let's say in the Thames valley [0.3] nineteen-eighties [0.4] er 
n-, non-routine work very innovative work but coping with a high degree of 
change [0.5] er we've got [0.3] er engineering driven production firms [0.4] er 
high change but routine [0.5] th-, d-, b-, they're beginning to look at work 
and organizations [0.3] and they're beginning to say [0.9] companies differ [0.
5] the implication is 
that their requirements that they have for office space differs if you're a 
high tech company [0.3] you have different requirements to if you're back 
office requirements [0.3] if you're a back office type outfit [0.5] or if 
you're er a er let's say an accountant or a lawyer or an academic again you've 
maybe got different space requirements [1.3] so [0.3] nineteen-eighties you had 
this the beginnings of research into er organizations [0.6] and you also have 
[0.3] the er [0.8] the [0.3] the bringing into if you like the business of 
designing i hope we can focus that i've lost it [0.9] come in a minute [0.7] 
get it in a minute [0.8] quite hopeless it's a difficult slide to see anyway [1.
5] not doing very well [1.0] the bringing into if you like er office building 
of some of these leading name architects [0.8] this was this this pair of 
buildings [0.4] was designed by Ove Arup [1.1] er partnership [0.9] Ove Arup 
Associates to be precise [0.5] they're the headquarters two headquarters 
buildings designed for the paper [0.2] er producer manufacturer Wiggins Teape 
[0.3] in Basingstoke [0.9] this was 
known as Gateway One you'll see them down there if you go down Gateway One 
Gateway Two they built this [0.9] it's a deep plan office [0.2] it's 
bürolandschaft [1.5] it has [0.3] terraces of garden space on top of some of 
that deep s-, plan you've got er [0.5] balconies covered with grass and so on 
[1.3] that was a sort of nineteen-er -seventies office building in the nineteen-
eighties they commissioned and moved into this building [0.7] er which was the 
second Wiggins Teape building [2.0] that's it there [2.0] let me just go back 
to this [1.1] and essentially [2.0] it's like this [0.7] it's that [1.7] it's a 
slab on either side with a core and an atrium [2.6] but the significant thing 
about this building [1.4] is you go into it [1.5] there's the atrium [2.0] this 
is [0.5] naturally lit [0.9] this building is actually naturally ventilated [0.
5] there is no air conditioning in this development [0.8] what you begin what 
you see now is you've got [0.3] er internal facades which can be treated very 
differently a light er more tactile more er [1.5] m-, [0.3] more domestic er 
treatment if you like [0.2] er because it's 
internal space [0.5] so we've got innovation coming in we've got buildings 
which are designed [0.2] purpose designed with an occupier in mind [0.6] but 
have this new flexibility of combining if you like the advantages of deep space 
with er [0.5] natural lighting in this case natural ventilation [0.4] this is a 
very innovative building [1.2] and remember that Arup Associates were the 
architects who then moved on to design Broadgate [0.3] so this was a pioneering 
building that influenced what was going to happen in Broadgate in London [2.7] 
and what you're beginning to see in this period then is new attitudes towards 
the laying out of floor space [0.4] these drawings which i haven't given you [0.
4] all come from a a er a useful but as i say on the handout deadly boring book 
[1.0] er [0.5] by [0.4] i'll find it in a minute [0.2] Bailey [0.5] Offices [0.
6] Briefing and Design Guide it's in the resource centres a useful technical 
companion but very dull reading [0.5] useful for those of you doing that 
undergraduate site planning project [0.6] if you want to refer 
to it [0.9] and you can begin to see new ideas about the laying out of office 
floor plates [0.6] er [0.2] the way we might get a central core [0.6] er and 
we've got floor plates here [0.5] that are [0.2] ranging from twenty-six to 
twen-, forty-two metres [1.4] er [0.2] a f-, a floor plate here [0.2] again [0.
4] er twenty metres [0.4] with the cores on the ex-, on the outside of the 
building [0.3] remember Lloyds [1.1] again a similar kind of treatment here [0.
5] so what we're finding is [0.4] er [0.3] different ideas about [0.2] the 
kinds of floor plates er that would be possible different configurations [1.1] 
now who was going to occupy buildings like this [2.4] because this is where we 
begin to make the connection with big bang [0.7] the idea the demand 
particularly in the City of London [0.4] for very large floor plates dealing 
floor floor plates in which you are going to get lots and lots of people [0.3] 
trading stocks trading shares from computers [0.5] i've put it in the handout 
[0.4] i think it's something like er [0.5] the er [1.0] terminology i've used 
[0.7] trading floors the office's theatre or madhouse it's not my idea this 
comes from another source [0.5] but the idea [0.3] that they were [0.2] they 
were requirements [0.3] from certain occupiers for some very deep floor plates 
they weren't the generality they were particularly in the City of London [0.4] 
but it opened up new possibilities for [0.4] laying out office buildings [1.5] 
and then these are examples of floor plates [0.6] that were constructed in 
Broadgate and other places in London [0.8] the Broadgate office building again 
its cores sometimes on the outside [0.6] the deep floor plates Billingsgate 
other examples [0.5] so [0.3] we had a situation in which [0.4] er a 
combination of new ideas about floor plate layout [0.3] er new technology [0.3] 
er d-, demands from the occupiers were giving rise to [0.3] er [0.2] new and 
big buildings [1.3] now i showed you that building last week [0.6] sitting on 
top of Charing Cross station [0.5] that was only possible [0.4] by moving away 
from those traditional ideas of office layout [0.4] er [0.6] necessary because 
of the need to span over the running tracks of er Charing Cross station [0.5] 
but er marketable because there 
was a demand from office suppliers office users for this very deep floor plates 
[2.5] and in London [0.5] that is [0.3] er this is part of London Wall [0.4] 
which is many of you know London part of the Barbican development er a 
redevelopment in the immediate post-war periods nineteen-fifties nineteen-
sixties [0.4] this was one of those slab office buildings [0.7] and it was 
redeveloped in the nineteen-eighties into the nineteen-nineties [1.0] that's 
the building [0.4] er Alban Gate [0.5] again very deep relatively speaking 
floor plates [3.3] and this is the kind of layout we get [0.2] so we've got a a 
a building which [0.5] there we've got twenty-six metres side to side [0.2] 
clearly that's going to be even greater than that that's going to be something 
like thirty to forty metres [1.1] and what i've got here is a few slides which 
just show is that back to back no it's okay [0.6] a few sli-, slides which just 
illustrate this is the this is from the marketing brochures [0.5] er how the er 
marketing agents thought this building might possibly be laid out [1.4] and 
again 
it's a reflection of the opportunity because you're the City of London to have 
some very deep floor plates [0.5] very er [0.3] high [0.2] densities of 
occupation [0.8] another [1.5] image here [0.2] and now that's a dealing floor 
[0.9] layout there [2.2] if you were to study this in some detail actually 
there were problems with this [1.3] and one of the reasons was [0.2] all the 
toilets [0.8] were here [2.3] and the reality was that as the market crashed [0.
4] this building proved hard to let [0.4] why [0.6] because you could almost 
only let it floor by floor [0.6] it couldn't readily [0.3] be subdivided [0.3] 
unless you started introducing additional corridors which meant the net to 
gross dropped [0.8] so there's a there's trade-off if you like with these very 
deep buildings perhaps with all buildings on how you [0.2] the ratio between [0.
5] where the service cores are where the public toilet facilities are [0.4] er 
the escape staircase and the total floor area it has an impact on the 
building's letability [2.9] Lloyds er i've mentioned [0.4] er [0.5] a building 
in which all those cores were taken to the outside 
of the building [1.2] which then enabled sorry about that [0.4] er stand on 
your heads [0.5] this very dramatic central atrium to be created [0.3] because 
all the services had been pushed to the edge so you get a lot of free space [2.
0] 
and Broadgate [0.5] that is correct [0.5] again many of these buildings are are 
are building around that possibility of deep floor splace [3.7] er [2.1] Isle 
of Dogs Canary Wharf [0.5] another example of these sorts of buildings what you 
also see here is some of the innovation that was occurring in the nineteen-
eighties [0.2] into construction techniques terms [0.3] fast track building [0.
6] er buildings with frame buildings in which you added [0.2] the panels [0.4] 
er the panels which could then be taken off and you could re [0.2] front the 
elevat-, you could re-elevate the building perhaps in twenty years time [0.5] 
you've got that in er in er Canary Wharf you've got it in Broadgate [0.5] and 
so on a lot of innovation coming in in the nineteen-eighties [0.5] er new 
construction techniques new procurement techniques which er you'll be hearing 
about later on in this series of lectures [0.5] er ways of getting the building 
[0.3] why were they trying to procure buildings in a different way because if 
[0.2] if you could construct a building faster [0.2] you could let it faster [0.
5] and that meant therefore y-, your costs of borrowing were shortened reduced 
because [0.2] rental income was coming in that much sooner [0.4] so even if 
some of these construction methods were more expensive [0.5] there was 
considerable er value to be had by [0.5] building more quickly [2.7] okay [0.9] 
let me er let me move into [0.2] er the [0.6] er nineteen-nineties [2.9] 
nineteen-eighties then was an expansive period [0.5] in which er [1.1] lot of 
development was taking place [0.5] er in which there was quite a lot of 
innovation particularly in offices in the City of London [0.8] er and London 
more generally [0.7] some of that innovation was diffusing if you like to other 
parts of the country but not [0.3] on on a on a particularly great scale [1.9] 
by the time you get into the nineteen-nineties of course we have the recession 
[0.7] er and a lot of worry a lot of a-, th-, a lot of oversupply of offices [0.
6] a lot of offices founding finding that they didn't have a market that 
perhaps they weren't suited to tenant requirements [0.4] they were certainly 
overspecified [0.4] that they had been constructed to a standard in terms of 
lifts of er floor loadings and so on [0.5] 
standards which had been set by [0.2] the institutions the financial 
institutions because they were the ones that were funding the development [0.6] 
but which [0.3] er the occupiers no longer felt they needed [1.0] er a quote 
that actually has come back to me [0.5] er [0.5] d-, during the course of 
marking some essays or some exam questions [0.5] quote that i gather Ginny 
Gibson was giving which was on on the effect that [0.4] er sort of the opulence 
of the nineteen-eighties office building didn't sit well with companies that 
were in the bus-, business of making staff redundant [0.6] so you actually had 
a situation in which the occupiers who were leading now [0.2] it was a sellers 
market customer is king [0.6] were saying we don't want the high standards and 
specifications and glitziness of these er nineteen-eighties office buildings we 
don't think it suits [0.3] the corporate image we ought to be projecting [0.7] 
in in the tight business environment of the early nineties [1.4] we also have a 
continuation of this sort of research if you like into the 
kinds of organizations [0.8] and i've included although you're going to find it 
hard to read [0.6] er [0.5] this diagram and er another one and i'll give you 
that er next week it's actually included i'm afraid in the wrong place in in 
conclusions [0.8] but this is [0.4] continuati-, continuing that process of 
looking at organizations [0.5] and saying [0.5] what kind of people are out 
there what kinds of requirements er do they have er for space [1.8] er again 
this is done by er Duffy and er er John Worthington [0.8] and they're looking 
this time at organizations in terms of [0.4] er [0.5] the amount of autonomy 
that people have [0.7] as against the need for interaction communication [1.7] 
individual processes the hive i'll give you some illustrations of that in a 
minute [0.5] group processes what they call the den [0.7] er concentrated study 
the cell [0.5] transactional knowledge [0.4] er [0.2] the [0.2] er club [3.6] 
the hive [1.2] think about [0.2] what kind of organization might be hive-like 
[0.8] in contemporary terms [1.6] perhaps that tele-call centre [1.4] where 
you've got a lot of routine work lots and 
lots of people doing much the same thing [0.4] er [0.3] but not much autonomy 
[2.1] certain kind of office might suit their requirements [2.3] er the den [1.
9] is is where you've got group work typi-, typically highly interactive [0.3] 
but not necessarily requiring a high degree of autonomy [0.4] fact i think they 
give some ex-, settings here yes [0.4] er insurance processing some media work 
radio television and advertising [0.4] this i think is a slide of er er 
television headquarters up in Grays Inn Road and so on it's a newspaper 
headquarters in Grays Inn Road in in London i think that might be that building 
[0.7] a different kind of er floor plate and layout [0.4] proposed there [1.8] 
er the club i think just going to move forward for a second [0.8] er the cell 
the kind of individual [0.4] where you've got to do a lot of concentrated 
thinking [0.5] it might be the academic it might be the lawyer working over [0.
3] a complicated case [0.4] it might be the accountant working through [0.3] 
some accounts [0.3] er on on their own thinking through very carefully what the 
issues are [1.3] and then 
finally going back [0.6] er the club [0.5] the idea where [0.3] er [0.2] people 
[0.2] have a high degree of er innovation [0.4] er but but they also need 
perhaps to work in groups it might be the management consultants brainstorming 
a problem [0.5] er it might be some advertising groups trying to find out [0.3] 
a new er solution if you like for a brief they've received from their client [0.
7] now what these [0.6] ideas are beginning to say is look we've got different 
kinds of organizations [0.4] and those different organizations have different 
sorts of requirements [1.3] autonomy then in one direction [0.4] the need for 
interaction in another [0.4] er and here we've got examples of companies being 
[0.4] er plotted if you like on this er matrix [0.6] er I-B-M [0.2] in the sort 
of club domain digital [0.2] B-A [0.5] er in the sort of club [0.2] domain i'm 
going to come back to B-A in a minute [0.6] er cells well we might put our 
academics we've got Channel Four not quite Channel Four somewhere in the middle 
[0.6] and so on [0.3] so [0.3] the thing is to think about the structure the 
nature of the organization and to 
think how that might impact [0.4] on the kind of er office space they would 
require [3.3] that then raises another interesting er concept to have in the 
back of your mind [4.6] when you think about office buildings [1.0] i'm afraid 
you can't read that terribly clearly on your [0.7] er handout [2.4] D-E-G-W 
have come up with this idea of what they call the seven Ss in office design [0.
7] reflecting if you like [0.7] the [0.5] the duration if you like in which 
different elements of a building [0.4] last adapt and change [0.7] and it's 
based on a very interesting er book by a man called Stewart Brand who [0.6] and 
er called How Buildings Learn [0.8] but essentially [0.2] in essence it's 
saying look the site [0.3] is something that [0.2] is [0.9] endures forever [1.
0] the structure of the building [0.6] is something which [0.3] perhaps in an 
ideal world will last sixty or seventy years [0.2] seven seventy [1.8] then 
you've got the skin of a building [1.8] that's not going to er last er forever 
[0.5] you might er [0.5] it in in D-E-G-W's terms you might renew the skin you 
might reclad the office building in Broadgate [0.5] in 
Canary Wharf [0.3] some of those other nineteen-sixties buildings we were 
looking at to give it a new image you reclad it [0.4] perhaps [0.3] er after 
twenty-five years [1.1] so the skin after er twenty-five years [0.3] then 
you've got the services [1.4] the air conditioning the ventilation the heating 
and so on how long are they going to last [0.5] according to D-E-G-W perhaps 
you'll renew those every fifteen years they become obsolete you need to 
refurbish them [1.0] er then you've got [0.3] what in in er [1.0] then you've 
got the basic plan of the building how you're going to lay out [0.2] the 
building use it [0.3] organize it [0.5] er in D-E-G-W's terms [0.4] they've 
called that er the scenery if you like [0.4] er every er seven years [0.6] but 
[0.4] er Brand disc-, then within that then [0.2] what he calls stuff [0.2] the 
sort of the the the ephemera if you like of an office [1.1] doesn't really 
matter which categorization you use as i say in my handout i first had 
difficulties with [0.3] the idea that [0.3] er settings if you like might 
change on a day to day basis [0.6] that's what D-E-G-W was suggesting [0.7] but 
when you start thinking about hotelling and hot-desking [0.7] when you don't 
have a 
permanent location [0.5] where you book up to have space [0.2] and we'll come 
to that in a minute with B-A [0.5] then that notion that in fact [0.4] your 
your detail setting is going to change all the time becomes becomes a 
possibility [0.6] so that's beginning to realize that you you you've got your 
investment [0.4] is the structure [0.7] maybe your investment and the site and 
your investment is the services [0.6] but they have different time scales of 
durability and you've got to think about [0.3] how adaptable how [0.2] po-, how 
possible is it to change the building er through time [10.8] right [1.2] so 
that's the context if you like that er that we're in [0.2] er [0.5] but we also 
have [0.2] er [0.2] innovations as we had in the nineteen-eighties [0.4] coming 
in to [0.3] er [0.5] respond if you like to these er new pressures [0.9] these 
new opportunities these new requirements [0.9] there are a couple of schemes i 
want you to er reflect on which are [0.2] er [0.4] c-, they come out in some of 
the references that i've asterisked [0.8] er this first one is what was er [0.
4] the er [0.3] N-B-M headquarters now the I-G-N headquarters a bank in 
Amsterdam [0.6] 
this was er [0.3] a bank a NatWest if you like [0.6] that had need of a 
headquarters of something like [0.3] er fifty-three fifty-four-thousand square 
metres [0.5] keep that figure fifty-four-thousand square metres in your mind [0.
6] er roughly speaking it's two-and-a-half times Apex Plaza [0.8] okay so it's 
it's Apex Plaza on top of namex station [0.3] two-and-a-half times [1.0] they 
were a bank [0.3] and they wanted a new headquarters building [1.2] the kinds 
of activities were going to be mixed er but er you know it would be some of 
what we might call [0.3] er the er [0.9] the hive sort of activities some of it 
might be more the den type of activities [0.6] er [0.2] but it's being built in 
the context in which this is north Europe with all the labour rights the 
workers' rights the attitudes to employment [0.4] that goes with er Scandinavia 
and and those north European countries [0.9] and so the way that er the 
architect here [0.4] whose name was might get myself a mind here Ton Alberts [0.
3] er approached it [0.6] was essentially to conceive 
of [0.5] a street [1.5] running through this extraordinarily [0.7] configurated 
tortuous building [1.1] er and on each [0.6] node if you like there was a 
vertical [0.2] service core [1.4] and then you have a little [0.7] er tower of 
offices [0.3] so it's not a single building it's a collection of o-, office 
buildings [0.6] er [0.4] linked together [0.3] er to create [0.3] as a scheme 
as we as we see it on the ground now i just to try and find [6.9] there we are 
[0.8] it's that [1.5] our depth has suddenly shot down to ten metres [0.5] from 
the windows [0.7] implications of that is lot of user control [0.6] a lot of 
privacy a lot of of personal space [0.4] er o-, occupier control over heating 
and ventilation and so on [0.6] but there are also implications on [0.4] the 
efficiency the net to gross [0.6] it's dropped down according to this to 
seventy per cent i've seen other figures which suggest that [0.4] er the figure 
is lower than that it's perhaps sixty per cent [0.8] on the other hand the capa-
, the capacity to make it into individual units this ability to cellularize it 
horrible word [0.5] er is something like 
eighty per cent [0.4] as against with bürolandschaft twenty per cent [1.0] so 
[0.2] think about that diagram you've got and reflect on [0.4] its implications 
[0.3] er for the layout [10.0] so that's the floor plan of the building [1.7] 
two-and-a-half times that volume of er Apex Plaza [0.6] laid out as a kind of 
street [0.4] and those are the individual [0.2] work units work place layouts 
[0.5] different degrees of cellularization but a a very high capacity to break 
it down into [0.5] individual [0.2] elements [1.7] so that's one e-, example of 
a of an office building er you're building on those sorts of principles [1.4] 
another example influenced by Scandinavian attitudes to floor plates is the Ark 
[1.4] you'll know it's now occupied [0.3] this was a building that was supposed 
had a had a n-, a nominated tenant and i can't remember who it was it might 
have been [1.4] Pepsi [0.4] North American company 
sm1145: 
nm1141: sorry 
sm1145: Coca-cola [0.2] 
nm1141: Coca-cola it was r-, okay [0.4] and they withdrew after the building 
had been built it's now let to Seagram [0.4] which is a games 
North American games [0.6] people [1.8] that's the floor plate [1.9] with the 
bit you never see [0.4] this is based on what's call-, it's combined cellular 
and [0.2] what's called open-plan they call the combi layout it's a 
Scandinavian system [0.5] and you can see that you've got a floor plate that is 
roughly speaking as i as i remember it about twenty metres side to side [0.6] 
but a lot of common space an atrium here [0.7] er with an extraordinary [0.3] 
internal [1.9] openness about it [1.4] so these are some of the if you like the 
innovative design ideas [0.3] impact on this the building though proved very 
hard to let [0.4] once the nominated tenant er pulled out it was it was vacant 
for something like s-, [0.3] five six years [0.2] and i believe had to have 
quite a lot of alterations [0.6] done to it does anybody know [0.3] i've i 
haven't this is as it was before it was let [0.5] 
sm1146: [1.3] 
nm1141: [laughter] okay [0.2] well [0.3] never mind [0.4] okay [1.3] also very 
influential [0.2] er is this building [0.2] the headquarters of S-A-S [0.9] er 
[0.4] designed er by Niels Torp [0.8] er and [0.6] again think about [0.4] this 
question 
of how people are working the different organizational layouts the structures 
of organizations [1.5] this is essentially laid out as a street [1.3] again i 
believe this building has i don't know if i have the figures here [0.6] about 
fifty-thousand square metres [1.1] and there's a street running through it [0.
8] and then the offices are laid out on either side if we begin to home in on 
that [0.5] thirteen er [0.5] i can safely do this can't i [1.5] see if i can 
focus it for you a bit better [1.4] thirteen is an auditorium [0.6] fourteen is 
a library [1.0] fifteen if we can find it is a servery [0.2] servery [1.5] er 
what's sixteen [0.8] sixteen is staff dining [0.4] seventeen that's there [1.1] 
er seventeen is guest dining [1.2] eighteen [0.7] er directors' dining so we've 
still got a bit of hierarchy creeping into here [0.6] number ten here we've got 
a club room [0.4] we've got a pool [0.5] we've got a gymnasium [0.3] we've got 
a sports hall [0.5] [laughter] we've got health and fitness you er fancy 
working in this building [0.7] you know [0.4] all of this is laid out on the 
ground floor of this 
building and then above it [0.4] you have the offices [2.4] so that's the image 
you get of this building is constructed there's the [0.5] er the the public 
space or if you like the [0.5] the er the the the the private er semi-public 
domain of of all members of staff and then the offices on either side [1.0] now 
think about that in the context of changing patterns of work this is a building 
which in theory you know if you've got staff coming and going if you want to 
keep workers happy [0.3] employees happy [0.5] this is offers huge 
possibilities doesn't it i-, for [0.5] er you know [0.6] exchange of ideas for 
relaxing and so on [1.7] and the significance of this is sorry we just go back 
to that [0.5] this is the architect [0.2] or [0.5] or er [0.3] Niels Torp is 
the architect who B-A commissioned to design their headquarters [0.3] at 
Heathrow [0.8] which although i haven't been in it [0.5] i'm told is like this 
this is the configuration they've adopted [1.5] and then just think again about 
something about Heathrow building [0.4] fifty-three-thousand square [0.2] 
metres [1.4] which was to er 
accommodate [1.1] two-thousand members of staff [1.4] some of you are doing a 
site planning project might like to reflect on this that essentially means [0.
5] er [0.3] what nineteen square nineteen twenty square metres [0.2] per member 
of staff [1.1] within two years [0.9] B-A now intend that building being 
occupied by five-thousand people [1.3] which implies [0.5] ten square metres 
eleven square metres [0.2] per person [0.9] a huge increase in efficiency 
within this building w-, how are they doing it they're doing it because of 
course not everybody is permanently there [0.7] we have hot-desking [0.4] we 
have sharing [0.7] er [0.2] hotelling if you like booking in space [0.4] and 
that's the trend we're seeing and buildings like this [0.3] begin to offer the 
opportunities for that sort of approach to working [0.3] to work very 
effectively because you've got shared space meeting space so on and so forth [2.
4] okay [0.4] what's also er impacting on us er into er the nineteen-nineties 
is the whole issue about the concern for [0.4] er green buildings [0.5] er you 
know [0.4] energy 
conservation [0.6] you haven't got this but [0.5] er [0.7] this is a building 
designed er again i believe by [0.4] one of the ex-partners of Arup Associates 
[0.5] it's on Stockley Park [1.1] what you see here is [0.6] the building is in 
the middle [0.2] there is no atrium [0.5] but the the whole building is encased 
in glass [0.8] and the atria are kind of [0.3] internal external atria [0.4] 
they're there and there [0.7] so the building is cooling [0.4] er it's using 
this external space to act as a sort of a a buffer between solar gain [0.3] 
natural ventilation and so on [0.4] so [0.3] a lot of emphasis beginning to 
show in the nineteen-er -nineties [0.4] for green er energy conscious buildings 
but i'm going to be a little bit [0.3] circumspect about that er in a minute [2.
7] okay [0.8] i'm not going to say er [0.2] anything i think about offices in 
the city but i think you can reflect [0.2] the kinds of things i've been saying 
are going to c-, clearly going to have an impact on the kind of environment 
that er [0.5] we create within [0.4] our urban areas [3.3] let's then move 
towards er some er conclusions [4.2] i've included this [0.9] 
office quality circle [1.4] in your handout [1.8] i want you to reflect [0.3] 
on it [1.6] and reflect on it in the context of [0.5] time as well [9.8] what 
this is saying is that office quality [0.3] this was came from a journal 
article in the nineteen-eighties but it's come and to be more and more true [0.
6] isn't just a product of a dialogue if you like between the developer and the 
architect [1.4] but there are different players [0.8] in this process the 
developer the designer [0.3] the individual user [1.0] increasingly becoming 
concerned that individuals [0.4] you know [0.3] if [0.2] if [0.5] if an 
enterprise its value is derived from its members of staff if the staff are its 
asset [0.4] then organizations are going to be very concerned to satisfy [0.5] 
meet the expectations of those highly qualified staff [0.6] so you've got 
individual users [0.4] you've got the user organization maybe the facilities 
manager the the person or the groups responsible for [0.3] how well the 
organization as a whole is using and utilizing and operating from a building [0.
4] you've got the property owner you've got 
the investor you've got the owner [0.6] all of those [0.4] are different 
players if you like [0.6] in the business of producing er office buildings 
owning managing occupying office buildings [0.9] and also we've got [0.3] a 
whole range of considerations to take into account the running costs [1.1] er 
the nature of the lease [0.8] the move if you like from the twenty-five 
institutional year lease institutional fully repairing and insuring [0.6] let 
it off forget about it sort of attitude of the institutions to realizing that 
you maybe got to actively manage your building [0.8] capital costs building 
appearance user comfort user control health and safety productivity we've been 
talking about different organizations and working [0.5] office shape [0.7] this 
diagram kinds of encapsulates if you like the [0.3] the complexity of er [0.8] 
er [0.3] what you got to design for [0.5] er in er [0.3] in in developing 
offices [8.8] we've got [1.4] something which you need to hold in your mind 
changing market conditions [0.3] your pic-, market conditions of the nineteen-
sixties were different 
to the seventies were different to the eighties were different to the nineties 
[0.8] that's a dynamic if you like to this whole issue which we need to 
remember [3.2] er [2.0] what have we got beyond two-thousand here we are [0.4] 
two-thousand what what's holds in store for us [0.8] the likelihood is continue 
uncertainty continuing unpredictability [0.6] if you remember that first 
diagram i showed you [0.3] i handed out [1.6] just reflect on that [0.4] the 
bottom line [0.6] in each case [2.2] mixed use buildings [0.2] we'll talk about 
that later on [0.5] downsizing organizations hotelling flexitime what does all 
this bring [0.9] e-commerce [0.5] you know what's the impact of that going to 
be on office demand [0.9] systems [0.3] what sort of systems do we have I-T 
convergence not quite sure i know what that with emphasis on natural more entil-
, more emphasis on natural ventilation natural lighting [0.8] er finance how 
are buildings financed some of you know a hell of a lot more about that or will 
do than i do [0.8] culture office culture the idea of flexitime 
flexiplace [0.2] group working [0.9] employer welfare i mention this the fact 
that these north European [0.2] standards legislation might well come in and 
impact on us [0.4] networking how do people work and relate to each other [7.1] 
don't know whether i've got it here [7.4] this [0.2] overhead which copy of 
which you've got highlights some of the things we've been talking about [1.8] 
an emphasis four types of European buildings maybe [0.8] on one the emphasis on 
[0.2] users [0.5] maybe you see that with the Centraal Beheer maybe you see it 
with Niels Torp's building maybe you see it with [0.4] Ton Alberts' building [0.
3] in er in in the Netherlands [1.6] conversely we've got the emphasis on the 
exchange value [0.5] designing office buildings because they're speculative [0.
5] it's how much can we get for them that's the driving force [1.2] we've got 
some [0.2] that reflects if you like the developers' outlook [0.2] rather than 
the occupiers' outlook [0.7] we've got some examples of buildings which are 
designed [0.5] as as image statements [0.8] i tri-, wanted to show you a 
slide of er the B-M-W headquarters [0.3] building in Munich [0.2] but it's done 
at night-time and is a bit dark [0.4] but it [0.3] i talked about last week 
Natwest and it's logo [0.5] B-M-W's logo [0.2] is the floor plate of their 
building in Munich [1.2] and maybe there's a synthesis coming maybe you see in 
buildings like er [0.7] B-A hes-, headquarter building [0.2] the synthesis if 
you like [0.4] er of [0.3] er [0.2] er user value exchange value [0.2] some 
notion of business value what kinds of buils-, buildings are really going to 
suit the buil-, the business itself to perform [0.4] er to maximize its er 
potential [1.9] so that's if you like some of the er some of the trends [0.7] 
er i think i just want to show you [0.2] er one more [0.6] er and coming in to 
all of this [0.5] of course [0.6] is new ways of [0.2] providing and 
accommodating [0.3] er themselves [1.2] you know organizations saying [0.2] 
well we don't actually want [0.3] er [0.3] to own a building [0.4] we don't 
want to rent a building on a long lease [0.3] we're attracted by the idea [0.4] 
of perhaps getting somebody else [0.2] to provide all we need the Regus kind of 
er operation [0.6] 
so all of these are changes that are [0.5] underway when it comes to er offices 
[0.4] which you need to be aware of [0.4] just to [0.4] close then with a a few 
more er three more i think slides [0.8] er just to bring you right up to date 
here we have er Brindley Place development [0.5] it illustrates a scheme which 
is mixed use [0.5] er which er comprises offices and leisure uses and so on [2.
3] er sorry if i just go back a second [0.3] think got these out of order [0.5] 
this building [0.5] here [1.3] is [0.3] the headquarters [0.2] locally of B-T 
[0.5] where they experimented with their B-T two-thousand office which some of 
you might have heard about which [0.3] builds on these ideas of hotelling and 
hot-desking [1.7] that's the interior [0.4] atrium of that building [2.1] this 
building [0.7] is the that's the B-T this building is the one which has just 
won [0.4] the er office British Council of Office's award for the best office 
building in the year two-thousand [1.6] er [0.2] and in the middle we have this 
cafe which kind of encapsulates this whole idea maybe that it's no longer [0.4] 
just the [0.5] workers going to the office 
staying in their desks all day [0.4] we've got [0.2] a much more [0.3] er 
diverse and richer kind of er working culture and environment [0.8] er one of 
which there's the cafe [1.5] er one of which is saying well really we can sort 
of er live out on the streets we can telework we can hook our computer we've 
got our [0.5] our mobile phone which we can receive e-mails on [0.2] you know 
we don't need the office in the same way er as we did er in the past [1.4] 
which brings us back to where we began [0.5] our Dallas with all its offices [1.
3] and our guy working from a desk [0.9] in some cafe [0.4] it might be Greasy 
Joe's it's more likely to be some a pleasant wine bar [0.6] er doing all he 
needs in some kind of relaxed informal way meeting his colleagues [0.3] it's 
not to say that 
we don't still need office space [0.5] but the scale of the demand for office 
space the kind of offices we like [0.4] er [0.3] is [0.4] is [0.3] perhaps 
going to be very different [0.7] and that has implications [0.2] for that stock 
[0.5] of office accommodation [0.6] how usable is it how adaptable is it [0.3] 
how far is it going to meet the needs of [0.2] the next ten twenty [0.3] thirty 
years because those buildings [0.6] on those [0.2] criteria of seven Ss [0.2] 
those structures [1.0] could be there [0.2] in seventy years time [1.2] what 
are we going to do with them [0.2] that's another story [0.9] okay [0.2] thank 
you for your patience [0.2] er [1.1] think you've got a lecture [0.7] what's 
your next lecture it's not me next week
