nf1207: one on learning [0.5] next week [0.4] Dr namex will be starting [0.5] 
the final section of this psychobiology course but this is the last one of mine 
[0.9] and as i indicated in my last lecture [0.8] up till now [1.4] would you 
stop talking please [0.5] thank you [0.7] up till now [0.6] i've been talking 
about animals learning individually [0.8] and in this last lecture i'm going to 
talk a bit about [0.5] what animals learn in the company of other animals in 
particular [0.5] whether they learn from observing other animals and if so what 
[1.2] er [0.4] the terminology i'll be using is that i'll be talking about [0.
6] quite a lot of experiments where some animals are observers that is they 
watch other animals performing [0.6] and [0.3] and [1.0] other animals are the 
demonstrators or models that is they perform something [0.2] or behave in a 
certain way [0.3] and we want to know what the observers learn [0.4] from [0.3] 
watching the demonstrators or models [0.6] well what might they learn [1.2] 
basically the two kinds of things that they might learn correspond to the two 
kind of individual [0.6] sorts of associative 
learning [0.4] that i've been talking about in these lectures so far [0.5] for 
example animals might learn from one another [0.4] the significance of stimuli 
[0.3] what foods are good or bad to eat [0.4] what things are predators [0.3] 
these are the kind of things that we know they can learn individually through 
Pavlovian conditioning [0.3] but maybe they can learn it from watching other 
animals what other animal eat what other animals avoid as well [0.9] the other 
kind of new learning i talked about in my last lecture [0.4] is learning new 
actions [0.5] for example [0.3] learning how to get at or handle food [0.7] 
this is the sort of thing that animals can learn individually through 
instrumental conditioning as i discussed in my last lecture [0.4] perhaps they 
can also learn it to some extent [0.3] by watching other animals [0.4] and the 
two the sections of this lecture [0.4] refer to experiments in which these two 
potential kinds of social learning are studied [1.3] before talking about 
experiments [0.2] i want to talk a bit about the kind of naturalistic 
data [0.4] which suggest to people [0.3] that this observational or social 
learning goes on [0.5] that animals learn things from other animals in their 
social group or culture [0.3] which they would not learn in other situations [1.
4] well [0.2] there is lots of apparent evidence which has been interpreted as 
evidence of social learning [0.6] for example if you look at different colonies 
or troops of chimps the same species [0.4] but living in different parts of 
Africa [0.5] you find that different ch-, [0.5] troops show different 
behaviours [0.4] for example some troops of [0.2] chimps [0.3] build nests in 
trees [0.2] others don't [0.7] is it possible that the troops that show this 
behaviour [0.4] have learned it by [0.6] joint learning by copying each other 
[0.3] whereas the troops that don't show it have simply not had any 
demonstrators around so haven't had the opportunity to learn [0.7] similarly [0.
3] certain specialized kinds of food getting behaviour [0.6] there's a 
behaviour i-, a well known behaviour [0.4] observed in chimps by Jane van 
Lawick-Goodall [0.5] er which is termite fishing [0.4] where [0.4] a 
skilled chimp chimps [0.2] feed off termites which are little ant-like 
creatures which live in mounds [0.6] the termites have [0.3] holes through 
which they enter and exit from the mound [0.6] and chimps in some [0.3] 
colonies [0.3] have learned [0.6] to [0.4] get twigs or branches [0.2] strip 
off the leaves from these twigs so they are nice and thin and pointed [0.5] and 
poke the twigs down the holes into the termite mound sit and wait [0.6] 
eventually termites will crawl on to the stick [0.2] at which point the chimp 
whips the stick out and eats the termites off the stick [0.7] now this is a 
quite a skilled behaviour [0.3] but it's a very cunning way of getting termites 
out of mounds [0.6] and [0.2] it's shown by some chimps and not others [0.2] 
and more to the point [0.4] young chimps have been observed [0.2] watching 
their mothers do this [0.6] and the question arises [0.2] to what extent do 
chimps learn this skill by watching their mothers [1.1] er [0.8] another 
example [0.8] of a similar kind [0.4] which i mentioned in my last lecture [0.
5] is illustrated in this overhead [0.8] it shows [0.2] black rats [0.3] i said 
in 
my last lecture black squirrel that was a mistake it's black rats [0.6] feeding 
off pine cones [0.4] you remember i said that black rats [0.2] get quite 
skilled [0.4] at stripping the exterior off pine cones so they can get at the 
kernels in the middle [0.7] well adult rats of course do this skilfully [0.4] 
and in the wild it's very often the case that young rats [0.6] feed together 
with their parents [0.6] watch them [0.2] while they're feeding off pine cones 
and attempt to feed off pine cones at thems-, themselves at the same time [0.5] 
so the question is [0.3] to what extent are the young rats [0.2] learning this 
skill [0.3] by watching [0.2] the black rats [1.2] well you might say what are 
the alternatives the answer is there are lots of alternatives [0.7] one 
possibility is just that [0.3] young rats [0.9] tend to [0.3] follow their 
parents around [0.3] so when the parents [0.2] are among pine cones and picking 
them up [0.4] the young rat [0.2] also just because it's accompanying the adult 
rat [0.3] will also be in the presence of pine cones [0.2] also pick them up [0.
5] and it may learn the behaviour [0.2] 
individually [0.4] but just [0.3] because it follows its rat it tends to do it 
its parent it tends to do it in the company of parents [1.6] a slightly more 
sophisticated thing that the young rat might be learning [0.3] is that pine 
cones are good [0.9] they might be learning because their mothers [0.4] spend a 
lot of time with pine cones [0.2] there might be a kind of higher order 
conditioning going on [0.4] whereas they associate pine cones with something 
good [0.3] and therefore are attracted to pine cones themselves [0.3] and to 
try to [0.5] er try to get er t-, [0.2] try them out [0.4] and learn by 
themselves [1.1] this [0.4] what i'm getting at is that there are a number of 
simpler kinds of individual learning [0.6] that might contribute [0.3] to the 
young rats [1.3] i-, [0.2] to the way the young rat itself learns to interact 
with pine cones [0.3] which do not necessarily involve [0.4] the young rat [0.
3] actively learning its mother's actions [0.3] or still less being taught by 
its mother [0.9] as i have so often said in these lectures [0.3] you have to 
discount simpler explanations [0.3] before you can accept more complex 
explanations [0.3] of what in this case the young black rat is learning [0.6] 
so [0.3] in the [0.2] in [0.6] in the later part of this lecture i'll be 
talking about how experimentally [0.3] one might be able to distinguish between 
these [0.4] rather simple explanations that what the young rat is doing 
individual learning but somehow enhanced by the presence of its mother [0.5] or 
whether the young rat is really learning something by watching its mother [0.5] 
that's the sort of question we have to address [2.3] there are other [2.2] 
there's another very well known example that i want to mention briefly and come 
back to at the end of this lecture [0.6] which is the [0.6] macaques in Japan 
macaques are a kind of monkey [0.3] kind of rhesus monkey [0.7] the macaques in 
Japan [0.3] who learned to wash food [1.2] they were [0.4] these were macaques 
on an [0.3] island colony [0.5] which was [0.2] provisioned artificially fed [0.
3] by people [0.7] among the food they fed them [0.3] were sweet potatoes [0.6] 
these sweet potatoes tended to get sandy and dirty when they were lying on the 
ground [0.6] and it was observed [0.3] that 
certain individual macaques [0.4] acquired the behaviour [0.3] of dipping the 
potatoes in water or dropping them in water and then taking them out before 
eating them so they were nice and clean [1.2] this behaviour was [0.3] 
initially observed in a very small number of animals in fact in just one animal 
initially [0.4] but it gradually spread through the colony more and more 
animals showed it [0.6] and the question was [0.2] was this social learning [0.
2] were the macaques learning from each other [0.4] that it was a good idea to 
dip food in the water [0.4] i'll come back to this question at the end of the 
lecture [0.6] i won't stop with the rats diving for shellfish example because 
[0.3] er i don't really have time but there are [0.4] other examples where 
specialized behaviour such as diving [0.4] to get shellfish from the bottom of 
a river [0.4] are shown in just some colonies of animals [0.3] and not others 
[1.0] as i've tried to indicate [0.3] these kind of observations while very 
fascinating [0.3] do not themselves provide evidence of social learning [1.0] i 
[0.2] 
argued this in some detail in the case of the black rat [0.3] but we can argue 
it more generally by saying that [0.4] when you see a behavioural difference 
between different colonies of animals [0.6] this might be due to learning [0.3] 
social learning going on in one colony and not the other [0.6] or it might be 
due to particular environmental conditions which are present in one group and 
not in another [1.0] for example [0.3] chimps who build nests [0.4] might do so 
because the particular trees that they have exploited [0.4] provide suitable 
material for making nests [0.4] an environmental factor [0.7] whereas chimps in 
other areas [0.2] don't have such suitable trees perhaps if the chimps in other 
areas had suitable trees [0.3] they too would learn to build nests [0.2] 
individually [1.2] er [1.3] with the macaques watching washing food [0.4] it 
could be that [0.5] all the individual macaques are learning this by trial and 
error by instrumental conditioning without necessarily learning from each other 
[0.5] and so on [0.7] so [0.4] we need some way [0.6] to [0.7] do controlled 
studies which [0.2] 
manipulate [0.3] what opportunities animals actually have to learn from each 
other [0.5] and see whether they do in fact learn [0.4] in the way [0.2] that 
[0.5] that is being speculated [2.0] [cough] [1.0] my first set of examples 
come from [0.5] a-, and and i'm going to talk about some fairly classic 
experiments in this lecture [0.5] but [0.9] i would point out before i go on 
that there is a really excellent chapter [0.2] on this subject [0.6] in 
Shettleworth's book [0.8] which is [0.2] referred to [0.6] in [0.7] the [0.3] 
reference list for this lecture Sara Shettleworth has a superb chapter [0.4] on 
[0.2] social learning it's called learning from others [0.3] it's very up to 
date [0.2] very thoughtful very comprehensive [0.6] and i'm going to mention 
just a few of the examples that she mentions but [0.5] if you seriously want to 
think about this area and it involves many complexities [0.4] her chapter is a 
very good place to go [1.8] anyway [0.8] some of the best known work [0.2] on 
[0.9] social learning [0.2] or [0.3] putative social learning [1.1] in rats [0.
4] in animals [0.5] are about food preferences [0.3] these are examples of 
learning the significance of 
stimuli [0.3] learning what foods are good to eat [0.2] and what foods are bad 
to eat [0.7] and as i pointed out in connection with the young black rats [0.8] 
many animals eat [0.2] in a social situation [0.3] they will eat in the company 
of other rats [0.4] for ex-, rats will eat in the company of other rats young 
rats will often eat in the company of their [0.4] adult [0.2] companions [0.6] 
so [0.5] the question arises what do they learn [1.9] for example it's very 
well known [0.3] that [0.3] young rats will tend to prefer the same foods that 
their parents eat [1.0] and in a simple experimental demonstration of this [0.
4] Galef [1.2] got some [0.2] adult rats [0.7] and trained them by prior 
training [0.3] using the taste aversion learning [0.2] procedure that i talked 
about last week [0.8] that a certain kind of food A [0.2] was good to eat [0.8] 
but they also learned to avoid another kind of food B [0.2] by means of taste 
aversion learning [0.5] so the adults prior to the start of experiment [0.3] 
had learned that food A was good to eat and food B was nasty [0.9] and they 
were provided with both foods A and B [0.7] and then young rats [0.3] 
were put in with the parents and allowed to accompany them while eating [1.0] 
and of course [0.4] naturally [0.4] the parents ate lots of food A but avoided 
food B [0.5] and naturally the young rats [0.2] did the same [0.3] if they were 
subsequently offered a choice between A and B [0.3] the young rats would also 
prefer A [0.9] the question is what had they learned [0.2] from the parents [0.
5] the first basic question is [0.3] had they learned that food A is good [0.6] 
had they learned that food B is bad [0.4] the parents knew both these things [0.
6] but had the young rats learned both these things had the adults communicated 
if you like to the young rats [0.4] both that food A is good [0.5] and that 
food B is bad [0.9] to test this Galef did the following simple experiment [0.
3] he tested the young rats alone [1.1] with food A versus a novel food that 
they'd never had before [0.7] if the young rats know that food A is good [0.2] 
they should prefer it to the novel food [0.2] and they did [0.8] so the young 
rats had clearly learned a preference of food A [1.6] now to test whether the 
young rats had learned to avoid food B [0.3] he tested them again on their own 
[0.3] with B versus C [0.6] 
if they learned from their parents that food B was bad [0.3] they should have 
avoided food B [0.2] and preferred the novel food [0.2] C [0.3] but they didn't 
they showed no preference at all [0.8] in other words [0.4] although the adults 
rats knew [0.2] that food B was bad [0.3] they had not transmitted this 
knowledge [0.2] to the young rats [1.1] so [0.3] the young rats have learned to 
behave to some extent in a similar way to the adults [0.3] but they had not [0.
6] learned all the information that the adults knew [0.8] they had learned that 
A is safe but they'd not learned that B is dangerous [0.8] and this simple 
experiment [0.2] makes a very general point [0.4] that just because [0.5] an 
animal [0.5] behaves the same way as another [0.3] doesn't mean it's acquired 
all the knowledge that the other has there may be simpler means [0.3] by which 
the young rats [0.2] come to behave in the same way as the adults [1.7] for 
example [0.4] it might simply be that [0.4] food A has become very familiar [0.
2] to the young rats [0.3] if you imagine what's happening [0.2] food A is over 
here food B is over here [0.6] the adults eat a lot of food A [0.3] 
ignore food B [0.6] the young rats follow the parents eat where they're eating 
[0.4] so necessarily the young rats eat a lot of food A as well [0.4] just 
because they're spending a lot of time next to the parents [1.1] what that 
means is that food A will become very familiar to the young rats [0.6] food B 
will remain very unfamiliar [0.6] and that in itself would just be a reason [0.
2] for the young rats to prefer A [0.6] because animals as i've mentioned 
earlier in these lectures [0.3] prefer familiar foods to novel ones [0.6] it 
might simply be familiarity it might be nothing more than that [4.4] that 
simple experiments can't tell us which [3.4] now [2.7] the next experiment i'm 
going to talk about is one where adult rats [0.7] learned [0.2] by interacting 
with each other [0.6] about [0.3] what foods were good to eat [0.4] so now 
we're talking about pairs of adult rats [0.3] not young and adult rats [0.7] 
and here [0.4] the situation is much simplified because we don't have the 
situation where the young rats follow their parents around it's not a [0.5] 
it's a much more straightforward situation [0.7] 
the basic [0.5] experimental observation [0.2] which these studies are [0.2] so 
which start from is this [0.7] supposing you let [0.2] one rat a demonstrator 
[0.5] feed on a particular kind of food [1.7] let's say it feeds on chocolate 
flavoured powder [2.1] you then [0.7] take that rat [0.2] and put it in a cage 
with another rat [0.2] who's never had chocolate powder before [1.1] there is 
no chocolate powder present [0.6] but the two rats will socially interact with 
each other [0.2] and a lot of that social interaction involves [0.3] sniffing 
[0.5] licking [0.6] grooming [0.6] so that [0.5] the [0.4] observer rat the one 
whose never eaten chocolate powder before [0.3] has a lot of opportunity [0.3] 
to interact with the rat who's eaten chocolate and perhaps smell that food [0.
4] on the rat [1.7] on on the demonstrator rat [0.9] and you might well think 
[0.3] that the [0.3] observer rat would acquire a preference for chocolate [0.
2] as a result of this experience and indeed that's what happens [0.8] observer 
rats who've been put in with a demonstrator who's previously fed on chocolate 
[0.3] if they're then given a choice 
between chocolate and some other novel food [0.3] they will prefer chocolate [0.
6] so clearly they're learning something [0.3] from their encounter with the 
other adult [0.8] but what exactly are they learning [2.2] [cough] [1.0] Galef 
did a series of experiments where he kind of simplified [0.7] the information 
[0.7] that the [0.4] observer rats were getting by means of this simple 
apparatus [0.4] rather than letting the rats interact with each other [0.4] and 
giving the opportunity for all sorts of potential [0.2] social transmission [0.
6] he simplified the situation so that he could present [0.5] the [0.2] the [0.
2] observer rat here [0.5] with a very simplified version of the information [0.
2] from the demonstrator [0.4] he did it by putting [0.4] the observer rat in 
this kind of bucket affair [0.6] in the wall of the bucket [0.3] was just a 
tube [0.3] in which another rat [0.2] could be placed [0.6] so it was not 
possible for this other rat to actually get in the bucket with the observer [0.
7] but the observer [0.2] could [0.2] int-, could [1.0] be exposed to [0.2] 
whatever sensory stimuli were coming [0.3] from the demonstrator rat [0.5] and 
the 
demonstrator rat [0.3] had eaten [0.2] a particular food [1.0] and the question 
is under what circumstances [0.3] would the [0.2] observer rat [0.2] learn to 
prefer the food [0.2] that the demonstrator had eaten [0.4] ignore these graphs 
'cause i'm just going to summarize [0.3] the results [0.3] of these studies [1.
3] in a moment in fact this is [0.2] this is number three on your handout [1.6] 
so [0.6] i've described the general [0.5] er the general procedure [0.9] what 
do observer rats learn [0.3] when they have the opportunity to experience 
another food [0.4] that [0.2] er th-, [0.5] another rat who has eaten a 
particular food [0.9] and [0.5] the observer rats were exposed to food X in a 
number of different ways [0.3] and then on their own in the absence of the 
demonstrator [0.3] they were given a p-, a choice between X and another food Y 
[0.4] to see if they'd [0.2] learned a preference [0.6] and these were the kind 
of [0.6] exposures that [0.3] Galef could make in his bucket apparatus [0.8] 
first of all you could have food X [1.1] er [0.9] smeared on the nose or mouth 
of the demonstrator rat [0.8] and the demonstrator rat was just a normal awake 
rat [0.3] so the observer [0.3] could [0.2] 
smell [0.2] the food [0.7] on the rat's face [0.6] and also potentially maybe 
exchange some kind of information with the demonstrator [1.5] the next ex-, the 
next condition was just the same except that the demonstrator rat was 
anaesthetized so it couldn't [0.3] actively [0.2] interact with the observer in 
any way [0.4] but the food was still there on its nose and mouth [1.2] in a 
third condition [0.9] the rat who had the [0.3] food on its nose and mouth [0.
3] was actually not alive [0.9] the only difference was that [0.3] in this case 
it was anaesthetized in this case it wasn't alive [1.2] and [0.4] you can see 
if you look at the result of the first three conditions [0.4] that [0.4] 
observers [0.3] learned a preference for food X [0.5] if they'd smelled it on 
the nose and mouth [0.5] of a rat who was either awake or anaesthetized [0.4] 
but not if they'd smelled it on the nose of the or mouth of a rat who was not 
alive [1.3] it's important to realize people tend to assume that somehow [0.7] 
the rats in condition three [0.6] were [0.2] avoiding a food 'cause it had been 
on the nose of the dead rat that's not the case at 
all they didn't avoid it [0.7] they just treated it exactly the same as the 
other [0.2] novel food they just treated it as it was completely unfamiliar 
they didn't avoid it all [0.8] but in the first two cases they actively 
preferred it [0.4] suggesting that for some reason [0.5] they learned that this 
[0.2] food is a good thing [0.3] when they'd experienced it on the nose and 
mouth [0.3] of an awake or anaesthetized rat [0.4] so what was it that was 
crucial [0.6] Galef tried two other conditions [0.4] for example he said what 
would happen [0.5] if you [0.4] expose the observer to the food not on the nose 
and mouth but on the back [0.3] of a live rat [0.7] and in that case they 
didn't learn a preference either [0.9] what happens if you just put it on a 
neutral base like a roll of tissue [0.3] then they didn't observe then they 
didn't find a preference [1.1] what Galef found in the end after these series 
of experiments that the only thing that was crucial [0.7] there didn't have to 
be a rat there at all [0.7] but that the observer rat had to experience the 
smell of the rat [0.3] mixed with the smell 
of rat breath [0.9] rat breath contains an unpleasant smelling chemical called 
carbon disulphide [0.6] and what Galef found was that if he just exposed 
observer rats [0.4] to the smell of food X plus the smell of carbon disulphide 
without any rat being there at all [0.5] they would acquire just as much 
preference [0.4] as if they'd smelled it on the face of a wak-, [0.2] a waking 
rat [2.2] what this implies is that there was no [0.2] real [0.2] social 
element to the learning in this case [0.8] the observers had not learned to 
prefer [0.3] the [0.7] food X [0.4] because of anything in the behaviour [0.3] 
of the demonstrator rat [0.6] but simply because if the demonstrator rat is 
alive [0.5] that gives them the opportunity to smell it in the context of other 
rats' breath and this simple rule [0.7] if you smell something [0.3] in 
conjunction with a rat's breath it's good [0.3] that's enough to produce [0.2] 
this learned preference [1.2] so [1.0] this learning will normally take place 
in a social context [0.3] other rats normally have to be around to generate the 
smell of rat breath [0.4] unless an 
experimenter comes along and fools you by presenting you with carbon disulphide 
[0.3] generally speaking you'll experience rat breath [0.3] with [0.6] a live 
rat [0.6] but what this series of experiments shows is that the presence of the 
live rat is not necessary for the learning [0.7] so [0.4] this kind of 
experiment helps us to refine our understanding [0.6] of [0.3] what [0.2] 
actually goes on [0.2] as opposed to what might go on [0.7] and [0.7] it's [0.
5] it's very interesting to see how [0.8] in real life [0.4] a perfectly simple 
form of learning [0.3] is enough [0.2] to produce [0.3] the desired effect [0.
4] that rats will produce foods [0.4] which other live ra-, that rats will 
prefer foods [0.2] that other live rats have eaten [5.5] the next kind of [6.2] 
stimulus significance learning that i want to talk about [0.3] is learning 
about predators [0.7] clearly [0.4] and i don't have time to go into this [0.5] 
animals have many ways of signalling the presence of predators to each other 
like alarm calls [0.5] it's very common for animals to learn [0.3] what's 
dangerous [0.4] in social situations [1.0] and [0.4] the experiments i want to 
describe now are a very [0.5] 
well known and elegant series of experiments by Susan Mineka [1.7] about [1.0] 
the way in which [0.6] monkeys [0.2] learn [0.9] that snakes are dangerous [4.
5] in [0.2] their natural environment [0.6] these are monkeys these are 
macaques again [0.4] who live in the Indian who live in India [0.3] mostly in 
[0.7] jungle or in areas surrounding towns where are there are a lot of snakes 
[0.4] snakes are genuinely dangerous [0.5] and [0.3] wild-reared monkeys 
monkeys that have grown up in the wild are all frightened of snakes [1.6] 
however [0.7] if you take [0.7] monkeys who've been reared in a lab [0.8] have 
never lived in the normal environment and have never [0.3] come into contact 
with snakes they are not afraid of snakes at all [0.4] you can show them a [0.
2] picture of a snake or even a real snake [0.4] they'll just treat it as a 
novel and slightly interesting object [0.6] so it seems very plausible [0.6] 
that monkeys in [0.3] the in the le-, in the wild [0.5] learn to fear snakes 
from other monkeys who've already acquired the fear [1.1] and Mineka set up an 
experimental situation [0.5] where [0.3] observer monkeys [0.3] could watch 
who were of course naive and didn't fear snakes initially as you'll see [0.6] 
could watch a demonstrator [0.3] who previously had learned fear of snakes for 
example a wild-caught monkey [0.5] and the question is [0.2] what would the 
observers learn from the demonstrator [1.8] er [0.7] to explain the [0.2] 
procedure before i show you the data [0.6] the observers were tested three 
times [0.3] first of all a pretest when they were still naive and they'd never 
seen a demonstrator acting afraid of snakes [1.1] 
a post-test immediately after they'd seen a demonstrator monkey acting afraid 
of snakes [0.5] and then a follow-up three months later with no intervening 
training [0.4] to see whether their f-, [0.4] whether whatever they'd learned 
was persistent [1.5] and the way the observers were tested was in a choice 
circus which was just a [0.4] a round arena with four objects at the four 
corners [0.3] one of which was a model snake [0.6] and the other three were 
neutral objects [0.5] and they simply measured [0.3] how much time [0.5] the 
observer monkey would spend [0.2] near the snake [0.5] if they were not 
frightened of snakes they'd spend about quarter of the time near the snake [0.
5] and a quarter of the time near the other objects [0.4] if they were afraid 
of the snake they'd spend very little time near the snake [0.3] and more much 
more time near the other objects so [0.5] how much time they spend near the 
snake is one measure of fear [1.0] the other measure of fear is that [0.4] they 
used something called a Wisconsin test apparatus which is an apparatus simply 
where monkeys have to 
reach over a gap to get food [1.3] and [0.4] if you put [0.2] a frightening 
stimulus in a glass box in the gap [0.5] the monkeys will be reluctant to reach 
over it to get the food [0.5] so in this test they put [0.4] a snake [0.2] 
either real or live in the glass box [0.5] and look to see how slow [0.2] the 
observers were [0.4] to reach over the s-, over the snake [0.3] to get a 
tempting bit of food [0.5] and the slower they were and the more disturbed 
their behaviour [0.5] the more frightened they were concluded to be of snakes 
[0.2] so the question is how did the observers' behaviour change [0.5] as a 
function of watching the demonstrators [9.6] the graph is slightly complicated 
perhaps i'll just stick to the top one [0.5] which shows [0.4] the time spent 
[0.4] near the snake [0.4] in the choice circus [0.5] and remember [0.5] an 
animal [0.3] that is [2.2] er [0.4] very frightened of a snake [0.5] will spend 
very little time near the snake [0.3] and much more time near other stimuli 
that are not snakes [0.7] now this first graph here [0.6] is not the behaviour 
of be observer but the behaviour of the model [0.7] it's the behaviour of the 
monkey [0.5] who really is frightened of snakes just to show you that if you 
really have a strong fear of snakes [0.4] this is what you do [0.6] in the [0.
3] choice appara-, in the choice [0.2] circus [0.6] mean time spent with each 
stimulus [0.4] the stimuli are a real snake a toy snake [0.3] a model snake and 
a neutral stimulus [0.7] and you can see that the [0.6] the monkey who really 
is frightened of snakes [0.5] spends almost no time [0.2] near [0.3] either the 
real the toy or the model snake [0.2] spends all its time near the neutral 
stimulus so that pattern [0.3] indicates very strong fear of snakes [1.0] what 
do the observers do [0.6] okay here they are on the pretest when they're not 
afraid of snakes at all [0.6] and as you can see they divide their time equally 
[0.2] between the four stimuli they show no avoidance of snakes at all [0.2] at 
the pretest [1.2] but at the post-test when they've had an opportunity to watch 
an observer who is [0.3] in the presence of a snake and acting frightened [0.5] 
now they behave [0.4] not as frightened as the model [0.4] but very much more 
like the model 
they spend a lot of time near the neutral stimulus [0.3] and very little time 
[0.2] near the snakes so they have acquired [0.4] fear of snakes [0.4] just by 
watching another monkey [0.9] and this fear is just as strong [0.2] at the 
three month follow-up [0.4] as it was immediately after [0.9] so this is 
evidence that [0.6] naive rhesus monkeys who are not afraid of snakes to start 
with [0.5] can learn that snakes are dangerous [0.3] just by watching another 
monkey they don't have to be bitten by a snake or attacked by a snake or 
anything [0.4] they can just learn it by watching another monkey [3.8] there's 
another very interesting feature of this learning which i want to mention 
because it [0.5] it allows me to link [0.4] this phenomenon [0.5] with another 
[0.5] effect [0.4] that i mentioned in my lecture a week ago [0.6] you remember 
[0.4] in my lecture a week ago i mentioned that [0.4] contrary to what Pavlov 
thought [1.2] associative learning is selective [0.7] some [1.0] pairs of 
stimuli if you like [0.4] are easier to associate than others [0.6] so [0.6] 
tastes are easier to associate with sickness [0.4] visual stimuli are 
easier to associate with external pain [0.2] in the case of rats [0.2] there 
are many other examples [0.5] now this [0.6] observational learning of fear by 
monkeys [0.4] turns out to be [0.5] to have rather similar properties [2.0] 
we've seen in the last experiment [0.3] that [2.0] monkeys can readily learn [0.
2] to be afraid of snakes [0.5] by watching another monkey who shows fear of 
snakes [0.9] but can they avoid [0.3] can they learn to avoid other stimuli [0.
4] not snakes [0.5] by watching [0.4] an animal [0.3] another monkey [0.2] 
who's afraid of those other stimuli [1.2] the problem is how can you induce [0.
2] a monkey to act fafraid of a harmless stimulus [0.5] well for this purpose 
[0.4] Mineka very cleverly just used a split screen video technique [0.5] she 
made a video of a frightened monkey [0.9] and at the bottom of the screen she 
showed either a picture of a snake [0.5] or by splicing in another video [0.4] 
a picture of a different stimulus which in her case was a bunch of flowers [1.
7] so the observers [1.0] were in two groups [0.6] one group of observers [0.5] 
watched a video [0.3] apparently showing a monkey who was frightened of 
flowers [0.2] but not frightened of snakes [0.5] that's F-L-plus S-N-minus 
meaning [0.6] this model [0.5] monkey [0.7] was afraid of flowers but not 
afraid of snakes [0.7] the other group [0.2] S-N-plus F-L-minus saw the 
opposite [0.7] they saw a video of a monkey who acted frightened in the 
presence of the picture of a snake [0.4] but not frightened in the presence of 
a picture of flowers [0.5] and the question is [0.9] would [0.2] each of these 
groups [0.2] learn to fear [0.3] the stimulus that the model [0.3] feared [0.9] 
or [0.2] as you might by now be expecting [0.4] is there selectivity so that [0.
2] the observer monkeys [0.4] can readily learn fear of snakes by watching a 
model [0.5] but not readily learn fear of flowers [0.4] and that's what 
happened [1.0] over here is the group F-L-plus S-N-minus [0.5] who watched [0.
4] a video of a monkey who was frightened of flowers but not frightened of 
snakes [0.6] and you can see [0.7] in terms of their reaction here again [0.6] 
in this case [0.3] slow responding indicates fear [0.2] so i'm sorry this is 
the other way round from the last graph [0.5] but [0.5] this is the case where 
monkeys had to reach 
over a snake to get food [0.5] so if they're slow at reaching [0.2] that's a 
long latency [0.3] that means they're afraid of snakes [0.8] so what you're 
looking for here is [0.4] is there a long latency [0.3] in the presence of real 
or toy snakes [0.8] the black and white bars [1.1] so here we see the group [0.
6] who had [0.4] watched a video of a monkey who was frightened of flowers but 
not snakes [0.4] here's prewatching the video and post-watching the video [0.6] 
and you can see that [0.3] first of all [0.4] there's no change in the 
attitudes of these monkeys to flowers they haven't learned to fear flowers at 
all [0.4] by watching another monkey being afraid of flowers [0.5] if anything 
[0.3] they've increased their fear of snakes a little bit [0.6] even though the 
monkey they watched in the video was not frightened of snakes [0.5] they've 
still [0.3] somehow [0.5] er presumably by stimulus generalization linked the 
two [1.3] the other group were completely different the group who've watched a 
monkey frightened of snakes but not frightened of flowers [0.3] show a big 
increase in fear 
of snakes [0.7] high [0.3] latencies for snakes [0.7] so [0.5] this kind of [0.
9] associative learning [0.5] observational learning [0.4] also can show 
stimulus selectivity [0.4] and i don't think you need me to tell you little 
stories to understand why that [0.2] might be [0.4] advantageous [0.6] because 
snakes are a genuine predator [0.5] therefore [0.3] monkeys who can rapidly and 
efficiently learn fear of snakes [0.3] from a small amount of exposure to a 
frightened conspecific [0.5] are the ones who are likely to survive if they 
meet an actual snake [1.1] so [1.2] i just wanted to show you that example not 
only because it's a very elegant experiment [0.4] which has also of course [0.
6] been used to cast light on [0.7] er [0.7] some of the [0.6] fears both 
learned and unlearned that humans show because of course as you know snake 
fears are extremely common in humans [0.4] even humans who've never met a snake 
in their life [0.7] so Mineka's experiments have been used to discuss the 
possible biological basis of snake phobia [3.5] but [0.4] er [0.3] i think th-, 
er but i also wanted to make the point [0.4] that there is [0.3] associative 
selectivity in that as well as in other cases [4.6] the second kind of learning 
i want to discuss is the learning of new behaviours [0.8] so far we've seen 
examples where animals [0.3] learn something about the significance of stimuli 
[0.6] in the food case [0.4] they learned that food was okay [0.2] but through 
a rather simple mechanism [0.9] in the [0.6] snake case they learned that 
snakes were dangerous [0.3] ra-, in a rather specific way through watching 
other monkeys [1.3] the next question is [0.3] can animals learn [0.3] complex 
new behaviours [0.5] by watching others [0.4] like [0.4] the question [0.3] can 
young black rats [0.3] learn [0.4] how to [0.7] gnaw efficiently at a pine cone 
[0.4] by watching their mothers [5.8] well experiments [0.5] on this topic [0.
6] have basically the following kind of design [1.2] obviously you have [0.7] 
one group [0.7] let's call them the experimental observers [0.5] who have the 
opportunity to watch a trained demonstrator who's already learned a particular 
action call it X [0.8] and importantly [0.3] gets rewarded [0.2] for performing 
action X [0.4] because clearly [0.4] if observers are 
going to learn [0.6] that performing this action leads to good things like 
getting food out of a pine cone [0.4] presumably they need to see [0.3] the 
demonstrator [0.3] actually getting [0.2] food [0.6] for performing the action 
[2.5] and in the test [0.4] the observers are put on their own without the 
demonstrator and the question is how good are they [0.3] at performing action X 
or perhaps how quick are they [0.3] to learn it by themselves [1.0] we need a 
control group to compare this group to [0.3] various kinds of control groups 
are possible [0.7] you might have control who watch a completely untrained 
demonstrator who doesn't perform action X at all [1.3] you might watch nothing 
at all [0.8] a better control [0.5] is to watch trained demonstrators perform 
action X but not get any reinforcement for it [0.2] that's much a much better 
balanced control [1.8] 
and if you find that it's the expe-, the experimental observers [0.4] perform X 
more [0.4] or acquire action X by themselves faster than the controls [0.4] 
they must have learned something [0.3] from watching [0.5] the demonstrators [2.
0] here's a simple example [0.3] of such evidence [4.9] this is an example that 
i took from Pierce's book [1.1] er [2.5] group E are the experimental observers 
who watch they're rats and they watched another rat performing action X which 
is pressing a lever [0.3] and getting food [1.0] there are two control groups 
[0.2] control group one [0.2] watch nothing at all they just watch an empty 
chamber so that's what i described as not a very good control group [1.1] 
control group two [0.6] experienced what i described as a good control 
procedure [0.4] where they observed another rat pressing the lever so they saw 
the action [0.4] but the action did not result in food [1.1] finally all three 
groups of observers [0.3] were put in the box on their own [0.5] and allowed to 
press the lever for three days [0.4] and in this case lever pressing did 
produce food so they 
had the opposite er the opportunity to learn for themselves that lever pressing 
produced food [0.5] after watching [0.2] these three [0.3] possible 
demonstrations [1.1] here's group E [0.4] who [0.3] had watched another rat 
pressing the lever and getting food [0.5] and as you can see group E [0.4] 
pressed the lever much more than the other con-, than either control group not 
only in the first session [0.4] but they learned much faster as well [0.9] so 
clearly [0.3] group E [0.2] had learned something [0.2] from watching the other 
rat [0.2] pressing the lever and getting food [1.3] and [1.1] what they'd 
learned was something [0.2] different from what the controls grou-, [0.2] from 
what the control groups might have gained [0.2] from their experience [0.4] 
it's interesting to notice by the way that the two control groups are very 
similar [0.7] watching another rat pressing a lever and getting nothing [0.5] 
really doesn't help you to learn [0.3] any more [0.4] than control one who 
watch an empty chamber [0.3] so clearly watching the rat getting food and [0.3] 
get wo-, pressing lever and getting food for it is quite crucial [10.7] 
now [0.5] once again [0.7] something is being learned [1.4] but we can raise 
the question what is being learned [0.3] how sophisticated [0.4] is the 
learning that's going on [1.3] when [0.2] the rats in the experiment i've just 
described [0.7] are better at learning to press a lever for food [0.2] when 
they've watched another rat press a lever for food [0.4] what might be going on 
[0.6] and Galef again [0.2] who has been extreme-, one of the most influential 
researchers in this field [0.8] set out some possible ways in which [0.3] the 
experimental observers might have learned [1.6] one very simple one [0.2] which 
is [0.5] er [0.5] perhaps [1.6] rather like a very simple explanation that i 
offered for the young black rats learning about pine cones [0.4] is what Galef 
called local stimulus enhancement [0.7] what he meant by that is this [0.8] 
perhaps [0.2] what the experimental observers learn [0.6] when they watch [0.7] 
the demonstrators [0.3] perform action X and get food [0.6] is that [2.6] it's 
a good idea to be near that lever [1.3] that because another rat is near the 
lever [0.4] they get interested in the lever [0.5] so when they're allowed to 
try it out on their own [0.3] they spend more time near the lever [0.3] and as 
a result they learn by the sort of processes i described in yesterday's lecture 
[0.4] how to press the lever for themselves [1.3] now [0.6] you should 
immediately be able to see that that cannot explain the results of the 
experiments i've just shown you [0.4] 'cause if that were what was going on [0.
4] you should have got just as much enhancement of learning [0.5] in [0.5] 
control group two [1.6] who watched another rat press the lever [0.3] and get 
nothing [0.5] after all control group two had watched another rat pressing the 
lever [0.5] so if it was just [0.3] local enhancement getting attracted to that 
area of the box [0.5] then [0.3] control group two should show just as much 
lever pressing but they don't [0.7] so clearly [0.9] local enhancement as Galef 
called it [0.3] while it's [0.5] logically possible [0.5] can't explain that 
example [1.0] however [0.6] what about the second possibility what Galef called 
blind imitation [0.6] which means just copying what another animal does [0.5] 
but not being aware of the 
consequences [1.1] er [0.5] you might say this is rather like [0.5] kids who 
smoke [0.6] because other kids smoke [0.4] but don't actually care whether it 
makes them feel sick makes them ill later or whatever [0.4] blind imitation [0.
2] without being aware of the consequences [0.5] well once again this won't 
explain that example [0.6] because otherwise again [0.3] control group two who 
performed [0.4] lever pressing without reinforcement [0.3] should be likely to 
elicit blind imitation [0.7] so that's not likely to apply here [0.5] but one 
that certainly could be going on [0.5] is what Galef called observational 
conditioning [1.3] which is that what might be happening is not [0.6] learning 
to associate the action of lever pressing with food [0.3] but just learning to 
associate the lever with food [0.7] perhaps [0.3] the animals in [0.4] the 
experimental group [3.0] learn [1.0] that [0.7] every time they look at the 
lever [0.2] because they're watching the rat [0.2] food is delivered [0.3] so 
they associate the sight of the lever with food [0.5] whereas of course the 
other groups [0.2] do not associate the sight of the lever with 
food [0.7] it may not be [0.3] learning the action of pressing the lever [0.3] 
it may just be learning that that lever is a good thing it's associated with 
food [0.5] and you all know what happens [0.2] if you give that kind of 
Pavlovian training to rats [0.4] if they learn to associate a particular object 
such as a lever with food what do they do [0.3] they rush over to it [0.3] they 
touch it [0.2] they nose it [0.4] and they're very likely to press it in the 
process [0.4] get food for it [0.4] and so this purely Pavlovian learning [0.4] 
may [0.2] set the scene [0.2] for instrumental learning [0.5] so this example 
could very well be [0.5] what Galef called observational conditioning [0.7] 
rather than what he called true observational learning [0.5] I-E learning [0.2] 
not just that the lever is good but you've got to press the lever to get food 
[0.4] that's what Galef called true observational learning [0.8] so [0.6] how 
can one [0.3] experimentally [0.5] analyse [0.5] which of these things is going 
on [0.2] i've argued that not all of them could be going on [0.3] in the rat 
case [0.4] but certainly [0.2] more than one of them could [4.4] a very 
neat experiment [0.3] to try and [0.6] sort out these possibilities [0.9] is 
this one [0.9] by Palameta and Lefebvre who were French Canadians which 
explains their [0.5] er slightly unusual names [0.6] still are French Canadians 
in fact as far as i know [1.1] er [3.6] in their case this was an experiment 
with pigeons [0.9] they had [1.6] untrained pigeon observers [0.7] who observed 
trained pigeons [0.5] performing a particular action [0.6] under a number of 
different conditions [0.6] the action was this [0.8] the [0.3] model pigeons 
were in a box which contained two bits of paper [0.3] a red paper [0.2] and a 
black paper [2.0] underneath the red paper [0.4] there was a bowl of food [0.6] 
underneath the black paper [0.2] there was nothing [4.2] it was easy to train 
[0.3] model pigeons [0.4] to perform a particular action [0.9] piercing the red 
paper with their beak [0.5] to get through it to get the food from underneath 
[0.9] so [1.3] the true observational learning group [0.2] of observers [0.3] 
watched precisely that [0.5] they watched [0.3] a demonstrator pigeon [0.3] 
perform the action [0.3] of piercing with its beak [0.8] directed at the red 
paper not the black paper [0.4] and they 
observed it getting food as a result [1.1] so [0.5] if [0.5] true observational 
learning is possible [0.4] it should be particularly good in that group [1.8] 
the other groups were given [0.4] experience that might be expected to produce 
either blind imitation [0.4] or local enhancement and the question is how much 
[0.4] improvement [0.2] in the behaviour would they show [0.7] first of all 
what did the groups have well [0.4] the naive group were just a control group 
who never watched a model anyway so they're just the baseline the controls [0.
7] the blind imitation group [0.5] watched a trained demonstrator pierce the 
red paper but not get any food [1.1] so if the only learning that was going on 
was blind imitation just do the same thing as the demonstrator [0.6] that group 
should learn just as much as the observational learning group did [0.9] if 
those groups were equal [0.2] it would suggest that the learning was blind 
imitation [0.5] but if the observational learning group were better than the 
blind imitation group [0.3] it would suggest that learning was more than just 
blind imitation [0.4] 
that it involved learning this action leads to food [1.3] the local enhancement 
group and this was quite cunning [0.7] they saw the red paper [0.6] and they 
saw the demonstrator put the head through the red paper and get food [0.5] but 
because there was already a hole cut in the paper the demonstrator didn't 
actually have to perform the action of piercing [1.6] so that group would see 
[0.6] what should produce local enhancement or observational conditioning [0.5] 
that this red paper is good [0.5] 'cause the pigeon goes near it [0.4] and it's 
associated with food [0.4] so if that's the basis of the learning [0.5] it 
should be just as good in these two groups [0.8] so the argument is that th-, 
there was another pair of groups which were tested after a delay but i won't 
waste time with them [0.8] so by looking [0.5] so [0.2] subsequently [0.6] the 
[0.3] observers [0.7] were [0.3] put in the apparatus [0.5] and Palameta and 
Lefebvre [0.3] measured [0.5] how much tendency they showed how quickly they 
learned [0.3] to perform the action of piercing the red paper [0.2] themselves 
[0.6] and the argument was if the true 
observational learning group was best [0.5] that suggests that more is going on 
than just local enhancement or blind imitation [0.6] but if either of these two 
groups is as good as the loc-, the observational learning group [0.4] that 
suggests that [0.3] the learning can be explained [0.4] by local enhancement or 
blind imitation [0.3] and does not require [0.4] the full [0.5] panoply [0.2] 
if you like [0.9] shouldn't use this word with namex here [laugh] he's testing 
out what language i use in my lecture you see i just realized that's a rather 
rare word [0.2] anyway [0.4] so [0.5] if [0.6] er [0.5] pigeons who were [1.3] 
learning the full [0.2] experience if you like [0.2] that [0.2] this action is 
needed [0.5] to get this food [0.9] then [0.7] only the observational learning 
group [0.3] should [0.4] be able to learn that [0.2] and they should be best 
okay so what happened after all that [4.8] forget the delayed groups we can 
just forget about them [0.4] these are the four groups [1.3] this is [0.4] the 
true observational learning group who watched the model piercing [0.3] the red 
paper and getting food [0.9] 
this is their [0.3] the latency of the observers [0.2] to peck themselves over 
a series of trials [0.3] these are like Thorndike's graphs showing [0.4] the 
latency of responding getting faster and faster shorter and shorter [0.4] as 
animals learn [0.7] and you can see that that group [0.5] really did learn 
fairly rapidly they took time on the first trial they weren't that wonderful 
they hadn't learned straight off [0.5] but they fairly rapidly over a series of 
ten trials [0.3] learned for themselves to perform the action [0.6] none of the 
other groups was as good [0.7] the group that was [0.6] a little bit better 
than [0.3] baseline [0.3] was the local enhancement group suggesting that just 
local enhancement just learning that red paper is associated with food [0.5] 
does produce some [0.5] improvement [0.4] so there is an element of local 
enhancement in this learning [0.4] but much more of it is observational 
learning [0.3] true observational learning [0.4] the blind imitation group got 
nowhere [0.3] suggesting that blind imitation just doesn't happen [0.5] in this 
set-up [1.2] and [0.9] notice that these results are different 
from the results with the rats pressing levers there's no reason why the same 
learning mechanism should apply [0.3] to pigeons learning to pierce a red paper 
for food [0.3] and to rats learning to press a lever for food [0.3] you have to 
do these experiments separately [0.3] for each situation [0.4] if you really 
want to know what's going on [0.4] but the nice thing about this experiment [0.
4] is that it does demonstrate [0.2] learning [0.3] that an action leads to 
food [0.5] and it rules out most of the simpler explanations except [0.4] a 
very small element [0.3] of local enhancement [6.3] finally then [0.7] er [0.8] 
i don't have time to discuss all these cases but [0.5] these are the 
conclusions i'd like to draw [0.9] er [0.3] we've seen from the lab studies 
that you can demonstrate these various types of observational learning [0.6] 
but [0.3] the underlying processes may not be obvious [0.3] and they may often 
be much simpler than one would like to believe [0.4] we're anthropomorphic [0.
4] we tend to believe that things go on in animals' heads [0.2] similar to what 
would go on
in our heads when we're watching [0.6] we think that if your mother shows you 
how to boil an egg [0.2] you learn all about how to boil an egg [0.3] and rats 
ought to be like that [0.4] when they watch their mother [0.2] chew-, chewing a 
pine cone [0.3] they learn everything their mother knows that just isn't true 
[1.0] animals' social learning is often a lot simpler [0.5] than it would be in 
our case [1.1] forget about the diving rats i'll leave that out because i 
haven't talked about it [0.7] er [0.7] i would like to talk finally very 
briefly about the famous primate examples [0.7] you remember [0.4] the case of 
chimps [0.4] fishing [0.3] for termites in a termite mound by putting in a twig 
[0.5] and you remember the case of the macaques who washed food [1.5] to what 
extent can we conclude [0.4] that [0.2] observational learning was responsible 
[0.7] well in the case of termite fishing [0.4] there's no doubt that young [0.
2] chimps [0.4] intently watch their mothers [0.2] when termite fishing [0.7] 
and after watching their mothers [0.5] they will often [0.4] make a clumsy 
attempt to imitate [0.4] they might get a twig [0.4] they 
might wave it in the direction of the termite mound [0.4] but just from 
watching their mothers they do not get skilled at it [0.7] they [0.3] do not 
learn from their mothers how to strip the twig they don't learn how to poke it 
in [0.3] in a very stealthy way so that the termites will [0.4] climb onto it 
without being ditu-, disturbed [0.4] they don't learn the whole skill from 
watching their mothers [0.5] after they've watched their mothers there is a 
long process of individual [0.7] learning [0.6] without necessarily another 
animal being around [0.5] so they learn a little bit from observation but they 
don't learn the whole skill [1.8] what about food washing [0.8] well again [0.
2] there's been [0.4] a lot of speculation about this example but i just want 
to show you [0.9] i want to tell you two things about this finally [1.0] the 
first is [0.2] this graph here [0.2] which comes from Shettleworth's book which 
is pretty simple [3.1] this shows [0.9] observation of this colony where you 
remember [0.5] the behaviour of washing pot-, sweet potatoes spread through the 
colony [0.8] this shows over a 
series of years [0.7] the number of monkeys in the colony [0.5] who were either 
o-, observed [0.2] never to wash potatoes and as you can see there were quite a 
lot of those [0.9] the number who were observed to wash potatoes starting with 
just one in nineteen-fifty-three [0.5] and increasing to about fifteen by 
nineteen-fifty-eight [0.7] and also a few who were in the process of learning 
to wash [0.5] now what can we learn from a graph like this [0.8] this line [0.
4] the number who actually wash potatoes goes up really quite slowly [0.3] goes 
up from one to fifteen in five years [0.7] so if this is observational learning 
it's very very slow [1.6] the other thing is to look at the shape of this graph 
[0.5] it goes up sort of steadily [0.9] now if observational learning were 
really important [0.5] you'd think that [0.6] the more animals had learned it 
[0.7] the more new animals would have the opportunity to learn [0.7] 'cause if 
there's only one monkey who shows this behaviour [0.3] it's going to be very 
rare for other animals to have the opportunity to watch her [0.2] and 
very few will learn [0.3] it was by the way a female [0.5] who was a young 
female who was number one [1.4] er [0.3] but the more animals who were doing it 
you'd think the more opportunity [0.3] other animals had to observe it 
happening so you'd think that this graph ought to go up more and more steeply 
[0.4] whereas in fact it goes up rather slowly [0.6] and Shettleworth argues 
that this kind of graph [0.6] is much more suggestive [0.6] of [0.7] individual 
monkeys learning [0.6] independently [0.4] by personal by individual learning 
[0.2] to do it [0.4] rather than watching other animals [0.3] one would like to 
believe that they do it by watching other animals [0.4] but this kind of data 
is really not very compatible with that hypothesis [0.4] it's much more 
compatible with individual learning [0.4] individuals learning [0.4] that oh 
this sweet potato tastes nicer if you put it in the water [0.4] or maybe there 
was some local enhancement [0.4] maybe they followed other monkeys to the water 
[0.6] and thus had a better chance to learn themselves [1.6] the other sad 
story [0.2] about the monkeys [0.2] on [0.6] er Kashima 
Island [0.7] is that it turned out later [0.6] that you remember i've said that 
they were artificially provisioned [0.2] they were fed by humans [0.5] it 
turned out later [0.4] that the humans who fed the monkeys were so charmed by 
this behaviour that they started training the monkeys to do it [1.1] without 
the scientists knowing about it at first [0.7] and in fact [0.6] quite a lot of 
this [0.2] increase [0.3] could have been due [0.3] to artificial training by 
humans [0.3] rather than by the monkeys teaching each other [0.6] now i [0.2] i 
d-, i mean i'm ending these lectures on a note of scepticism i don't want you 
know to feel that there's nothing interesting to know about social learning in 
the wild there clearly is [0.5] but the point i'm trying to make is that [0.5] 
before jumping to the conclusion [0.4] that some complex process is going on [0.
4] you really need to look a lot more closely [0.6] at the experimental and 
behavioural evidence [2.2] thank you
