nm0976: what i'd like to do this morning is to get into the sort of practical 
details of market research [0.6] if you remember what the [0.2] the programme 
looks like [0.3] over the next few weeks [1.4] in the next few weeks starting 
next week you're going to get quite involved with the [0.4] er the detail of of 
er [1.9] methodology [0.2] so next week [0.4] Professor namex is going to be 
talking about conjunct analysis which is a [0.4] quite a modern market research 
methodology to [0.5] er [0.3] basically [1.0] find out what consumers like 
about new products [0.3] er [0.2] potential new products [0.8] but before [0.2] 
we do all that we've deliberately dealt with [0.3] last week the kinds of data 
that you'll be [0.4] coming across in this er [1.4] er [0.6] course and the 
sorts of data that market researchers deal with [1.1] and this week we want to 
deal with the practical aspects of collecting that data [1.4] and there are in 
a sense there are always [0.4] we always [0.5] deal with this in two ways [0.5] 
and the first way [0.4] or or th-, th-, there are [0.2] in a sense two themes 
to this [0.4] there's a qualitative stream of market 
research [0.3] and there's a quantitative stream of market research [1.4] i'm 
going to deal with the [0.2] basically the quantitative [0.2] stream of data 
collection first [0.3] and then [0.3] look briefly at the k-, [0.3] the 
qualitative stream but just to draw the distinction between the two [1.9] 
qualitative research is essentially [0.2] exploratory [1.2] as i [0.2] i think 
i mentioned in week one you're trying to find out ideas [0.2] concepts [0.4] er 
[0.2] you might be testing people's reactions to certain things [0.6] but in a 
qualitative way and what that [0.3] effectively means is that you will never 
have [0.4] large enough numbers to do statistical tests [0.8] and this is why 
we're going to try and get this out of the way [0.3] there are [0.2] ways of 
dealing with you namex last week talked to you about attitude measurement [0.4] 
and some of that verges on qualitative but [0.5] what she was referring to was 
essentially building up enough information about people's attitudes to be able 
to [0.8] render it useful for statistical analysis of one sort or another [0.2] 
and attitudes [0.6] as you will see 
fall into today's session as well attitude measurement [1.0] so qualitative 
research [0.2] is about [0.7] basically exploratory work [0.8] today's the 
first part of today's session is more about [0.4] quantitative [0.2] work and 
[0.2] collecting enough data to be able to do something [0.4] statistical with 
it [2.1] now qualitative research in some ways boils down to a f-, very few 
basic techniques and [0.3] at the end of the morning i'm going to just show you 
a video which [0.4] shows you how focus groups work [0.3] because focus groups 
[0.5] are the er the main [0.7] vehicle that are used for qualitative research 
[1.8] it's often said that qualitative research should come before quantitative 
research [0.5] and for the sake of variety i'm doing it the other way round it 
doesn't really matter [0.3] because [0.8] qualitative research can stand on its 
own [1.8] you know as you'll see in a second in order to design a decent 
questionnaire [0.3] you need to have some idea of [0.2] where people stand on 
the issue you're looking at [0.6] it's dangerous of course to [0.5] er [2.1] 
impose your views as a researcher [0.8] so 
what you what what we'll be looking at are ways of [0.4] in qualitative work [0.
2] ways of [0.5] prompting the sort of information we need to design 
questionnaires [1.7] but we'll start off with [0.8] some thoughts and some [0.
5] methods for [0.4] dealing with quantitative data [2.1] and just to give you 
a flavour for what's [0.9] the sorts of problems and the sorts of issues that 
we're [0.3] going to be looking at later on [1.9] these are common market 
research problems [0.3] analysing product usage [1.2] very straightforward in a 
way just saying okay how m-, how much [0.6] of th-, [0.3] this product do 
people use why do they use it [0.5] how much more might they use and so on so a 
fairly straightforward [0.4] er quantitative [1.0] assessment of of product 
usage or sales [2.3] market researchers always talk about usage because it's [0.
3] more than just sales sales is just a number so much was sold [0.3] usage is 
far more concerned with [0.3] the way people [0.5] react to the product the way 
people use the product what people do with it and so on [1.7] you're going to 
get in [0.4] the next couple of weeks quite a lot on 
market segmentation [1.0] so quantitative research to describe market segments 
[0.6] and if you're trying to split a mass market into lots of [0.4] submarkets 
or segments [0.5] you need quantitative research usually [0.5] because [0.2] 
it's quantitative research that says [0.2] this many people are likely to be [0.
3] in this segment if you're trying to [0.3] target market [0.6] if you're 
trying to [0.2] focus on a particular segment [0.4] then you will need to know 
[0.4] er basically how many people are in that segment or whether it's worth 
your while [0.3] going for it [1.3] so describing market segments market 
segmentation is usually [0.4] quantitative and you're going to look at [0.5] 
cluster and factor analysis and other things [0.7] to [0.6] er [0.2] describe 
market segments [0.6] assessing attitudes as namex spoke to you last [0.2] week 
[0.4] er [0.7] attitudes of purchasers are assessed mostly by quantitative 
research [1.6] describing product image [0.4] is er on the border [0.5] again 
[0.2] quantitative research can be used you can collect data from large numbers 
of people [0.5] er to descr-, and and see [0.3] what they think 
of product image but there's a there's a qualitative [0.6] aspect to that as 
well [1.7] identify market opportunities and redefine and reposition products 
[0.6] namex talked to you about scaling well you're going to look later on at 
ma-, er at multidimensional scaling [0.6] which [0.3] comes up with [0.3] er 
ideas on those two those last two [1.4] er [0.4] items there [3.1] now a brief 
recap on last week [0.5] namex talked about the types of data well [0.4] there 
are different [0.9] types of data categories of data [0.3] and these [0.4] have 
a big impact [0.5] on [0.4] er [0.3] how you collect [0.2] the information the 
the the sorts of [0.7] er vehicles you can use for that [0.4] so [0.2] numbers 
as labels is nominal data [0.2] ordinal data where you put it in order [0.3] 
interval data where [0.3] there's some [2.5] implication of the distances 
between each [0.2] point let's say on a scale [0.5] and ratio data where 
there's some absolute zero point and [0.5] the [0.2] differences between the 
the points means something [2.1] now [0.2] how are you going to [0.2] get hold 
of people [1.3] we're looking at questionnaire design which is a sort of 
general [0.3] er description of of [0.3] 
of variety of different [0.4] ways of collecting information [0.5] but [2.2] 
the method of contact is obviously important how are you going to get hold of 
these people [0.5] and these are [0.3] the four [0.6] sort of most common ways 
not [0.4] necessarily in order but if you're thinking of [0.3] how market 
researchers collect their information [0.4] those are the ways they do it [0.3] 
number four now [0.5] is [0.3] being used computers are being used to support 
[0.5] er [1.7] market researchers [0.5] a great deal more and [0.4] the whole 
business of [1.0] both selling things over the telephone and doing market 
research over the telephone [0.5] has become [0.2] a very important issue in 
market research [0.4] and you'll see reference to th-, [0.2] to er [0.9] terms 
like C-A-T-I [2.8] computer assisted telephone interviewing [0.4] i me-, i 
think it probably goes without saying now that when you're phoned up [0.8] and 
somebody wants to conduct a market research interview with you [0.3] er they're 
probably sitting in front of [0.8] a P-C and we'll we'll [0.8] look at some of 
the [0.4] implications of that but [0.3] one of the main ones of 
course is that [0.4] the [0.2] data entry [0.5] occurs at the same time as the 
[1.2] asking of the questions so there's huge savings in terms of that and 
indeed some of the analysis [0.3] can go on [0.2] more or less as you're 
speaking [1.2] things like [0.6] you know in questionnaires you'll need to [0.
4] need to skip [0.6] from one section to another well the [0.3] computer does 
that automatically [0.6] next week you're going to hear about a technique 
called adaptive conjoint analysis [0.4] and this is an analysis method that [0.
5] i-, [0.3] as it suggests sort of adapts to the person who's being 
interviewed [0.4] and starts to [0.3] er [0.3] react or ask different questions 
depending on the [0.5] er the person [1.9] telephone interviewing [1.0] er is 
[0.5] increasing in in er [0.2] its coverage its its importance [1.2] but [0.8] 
in some ways [0.2] it's postal questionnaires that we [0.3] we want to [0.2] 
concentrate on today because [0.3] it's postal questionnaires that in a sense 
have to be the most accurate [1.1] because posnal k-, postal questionnaires [0.
5] are [0.3] the ones where the respondent doesn't have any help at all [1.4] 
er [1.6] there may be follow-ups and you may 
follow up by telephone and so on [0.4] but [0.4] er [0.2] it's postal 
questionnaires which need [0.3] to be the most accurate if you like [1.9] 
personal interviewing [3.3] in some ways is very good very high levels of 
response [0.6] because although you might have [1.2] told [0.4] somebody on 
Broad Street who is trying to hassle you to answer a few questions to go away 
[0.3] but at at that [0.2] the response rate for [0.4] er personal interviews 
is actually far higher [0.5] than these other methods [0.9] people find it a 
lot more difficult to turn away somebody who's [0.6] sort of standing there in 
front of them [1.3] the problem with personal interviews of course is that [0.
4] the interviewer is there [0.5] and the interviewer [0.2] themselves can [0.
4] bias [0.3] the results and i think that's just [0.5] it's a it's a l-, it's 
a lesson [0.4] in research in general [1.1] that [1.3] interviewer bias of 
course is to be avoided [0.9] but if you've got somebody in person and and [0.
7] i-, it's very interesting if you think about this perhaps [0.2] having done 
this course you might think well [0.5] you know i i tend to submit to these 
interviewers just 
to see how they do it and whether they're any good at it [0.7] and [0.6] you 
quite often find personal interviews where the interviewer is [0.3] hassling 
you to answer the question [0.7] and so you you're you're you're sort of 
thinking about your and they say [0.3] well [0.2] how about or do you mean [0.
3] and this kind of thing and and this is where distortions can come in [1.0] 
so [1.7] personal interviews [0.5] are [0.5] good high response rates [0.4] but 
there is the problem of bias and of course they're very expensive you're em-, 
[0.2] employing [0.6] real people [0.5] to ask these questions [2.5] telephone 
interviewing less expensive but a less good response rate and again some 
problems of [0.6] of bias [0.4] there's a there's a there's a problem whenever 
you're a person who's asking another person questions [0.5] there's always a 
problem of bias because [0.2] you want people to [0.5] er [0.3] expand on their 
answers and you want people to [0.5] er sort of chat about what they're 
interested in [0.3] and therefore you have to interact with them [0.4] and that 
interaction is what can cause 
the biases [1.4] er [0.3] the alternative is to have a very strict interviewing 
schedule and a very strict questionnaire [0.5] and you do get this particularly 
on the telephone where [0.8] you know you get this sort of automaton who's 
actually a person but they're [0.4] they're [0.5] it's a very stilted kind of 
interview and some would say that the quality of the data [0.6] that is [0.9] 
collected as a result is not that high [1.4] so we're concentrating on postal 
questionnaires but as-, accepting that you need good [0.6] a good [0.3] data 
collection [0.5] er [1.1] device for all of those things [2.5] well sampling 
you're probably all familiar with sampling but [0.3] you've got to make these 
decisions [1.1] you've got to identify the population of people that you're [0.
6] er [0.3] researching population of people you're talking to [0.4] you need 
to draw up a sample frame that is [0.2] some device which says [0.2] here are 
[0.3] er the rules that we're going to use in sampling these people [3.8] the 
sampling unit are you going to sample households [0.5] or individuals [0.4] 
males females and so on so picking 
the [0.2] the people [2.7] the sampling method [0.8] well [0.6] statisticians 
would love everything to be probability samples preferably random [0.8] er [0.
3] in practice [0.4] i think most market researchers are much more pragmatic 
than that [0.4] so [0.2] that pragmatism means that they [0.3] start [0.5] 
looking at non-probability samples [0.7] quota samples saying right we'll have 
certain numbers of people in each of these categories [0.4] er [1.1] when you 
get on to things like consumer panels [0.5] they're probably sampled more [0.4] 
er [0.6] accurately if you like or more scientifically [0.3] the only problem 
with them is that you've got the same [0.4] people every time that's a good 
thing but it's also a bad thing because they [0.6] they become their 
characteristics [0.5] then get [0.4] er [1.4] er in a sense put into the the 
the research process and they they [0.4] er may be atypical by [1.0] 
cooperating with you [1.1] sample size you've got to decide [0.5] sample plan 
how are you actually going to do it [3.9] now i'm going to show you lots of 
examples of different types [0.2] of [0.3] questions that you can ask [1.6] 
here are some very 
general [0.3] design issues though [1.6] questions need to be precise as you'll 
you'll see in a moment [1.0] they need to be [0.5] well-ordered [1.4] 
incidentally s-, sorry i should have said this earlier [0.8] the [2.1] 
assessment for this course [0.4] er [0.2] we will i think announce next week 
formally but what it's going to be [0.6] is a [1.1] case study [0.3] basically 
and you will be asked to [0.5] evaluate comment appraise the case study [0.4] 
and it'll be a case study describing a sort of typical market research process 
[0.9] er but it will also include data [1.2] so there will be data that you can 
analyse to support your case [0.3] and you will be able to analyse it basically 
in whatever way you want to [0.6] and that'll be up to you [0.7] i i say that 
now because [0.4] you won't [0.9] if somebody was asking earlier about will we 
have to do a questionnaire and that they've probably been talking to people who 
did it last year where [0.4] we [0.2] everybody [0.2] every single individual 
ran a questionnaire and it got [0.7] it actually got rather out of hand it was 
[0.2] extremely difficult to mark because 
people producing [0.3] huge volumes of things so [0.2] this is this session is 
just to introduce you to how [0.6] this sort of data is collected but you won't 
be doing this as part of the assessment [1.6] so questions have got to be 
precise and i'm going to show you some examples of [0.2] good and bad questions 
in a second [1.0] you need to decide [0.5] very [0.5] carefully on the ordering 
[0.8] i think there's no excuse these days for [0.4] in a sense for getting 
this wrong and certainly [0.2] presentation is really important [0.7] and so 
we'll talk a little bit about presentation and how you order [0.3] the 
questions to make sure that you get [0.3] there's a there are different schools 
of thought [0.3] to make sure that you get [0.4] an optimum response [2.9] in 
preparing yourself for this you need to [0.2] have some idea of what you think 
people are going to [0.4] respond or how you think people are going to respond 
[0.9] so the sort of categories the sort of ways people might respond [0.3] the 
different possible answers to multiple choice questions for example [1.6] you 
need [0.3] instructions [0.3] for interviewers [1.2] and as i say this can 
range from [0.2] very [0.3] explicit [0.3] instructions to as to how somebody 
should ask particular questions [0.4] or it could just be [0.3] er [1.7] 
so some questionnaires as you'll see have very [0.5] er clear instructions for 
interviewers some have [0.3] instructions that are really [0.5] may well be 
over the top may well be too detailed [1.4] and then data processing 
requirements [0.6] [cough] and you'll see some examples of how [0.5] er we [0.
3] mark up questionnaires in order to [0.5] make them amenable to [0.5] data 
processing [3.0] so how are we going to develop this thing [1.4] well [0.7] you 
need [0.7] some kind of [0.7] er [0.8] statement of objectives the sort of 
resources you have available [0.2] and the constraints to [0.2] the development 
of the [0.3] the survey [1.5] so [0.5] you've got to set very clear objectives 
as to what [0.4] your [0.5] er questionnaire is designed to achieve [1.2] you 
need to say something about [0.4] how [0.6] you're going to collect the data 
the sorts of [0.7] types of question that you're going to have the [0.2] the 
way you word them [0.4] the flow of the questionnaire and so on [0.4] 
obtaining approval is important [1.8] in the university we have er [1.0] a [1.
7] body known as the Ethics Committee [0.8] and technically speaking if you [0.
4] go out [0.5] well if you go outside the university [0.6] to [0.5] er [1.6] 
research anything you need to get the approval of the Ethics Committee [0.7] 
and the Ethics Committee is [0.3] in some ways is quite a good idea the 
university and indeed [0.5] any market research body [0.4] doesn't want [0.3] 
the [0.3] its name to be pulled down by the market research process of course 
[0.7] er [0.2] and so we have to if we're going out and indeed if [0.3] 
students are doing projects we have to [0.2] get the implicit approval of the 
Ethics Committee [0.5] sometimes that can come from the head of department [1.
0] but er [1.4] two or three years ago just [1.2] for your information the er 
[0.4] this group [0.4] was actually a group of undergraduate students [0.9] 
decided to do a [0.5] a market research project which was the assessment for 
the course [0.6] er [0.4] and they were given a free choice as to what [0.2] 
subject they wanted to [0.7] er [1.1] ask people about and [1.2] er the [0.5] 
explicit [0.4] instruction was that the people 
they researched should only be members of the course [0.7] and this group came 
and said [0.3] we want to do [1.5] a kind of sex survey [1.2] and what this was 
it w-, it was fairly innocent although [0.5] er i did say [0.5] you know this 
must strictly be kept within the [1.2] group and it it sort of [1.3] i won't go 
into the details but it it was asking various fairly personal questions [0.6] 
and [0.2] the [1.0] first i heard well the next thing i heard of it was [0.5] 
somebody called up from who'd been [0.2] accosted by one of these students [0.
4] somewhere down in town [0.6] and had been asked these questions and [0.5] we 
got into a little bit of trouble about it and [0.8] we hadn't cle-, i hadn't 
cleared it with the committee because it wasn't [0.6] er [0.3] i didn't believe 
it was going out so anyway [0.2] there are there are that's a a very obvious 
problem but you do need to obtain approval [0.2] there is a market research 
society code of practice [0.3] on [0.6] on asking [0.7] er [0.5] questions on 
on [0.5] how to do research [2.8] you need to pretest the questionnaire this is 
really important those of you some of you 
will be doing this for [0.5] er [0.8] your [1.1] dissertations some of you i 
know are collecting [0.2] primary data [0.6] you need to pretest the thing 
because [0.4] you're the researcher you're very close to the subject you know 
what you're talking about [0.3] but you've got to check that other people do as 
well and if you want a [0.2] statistically valid sample of a hundred people or 
two-hundred people [0.5] you've got to make sure you're collecting the data 
properly [0.6] and it's [0.2] these pretests or pilots [0.5] that will tell you 
whether it's [0.2] going to work or not [0.7] so make sure you do pilots and 
and [0.4] you know this this can be up to s-, [0.3] sort of half a dozen [0.4] 
different [0.6] er people that you question and you will soon find [0.5] if 
you've got any doubts about the length of the questionnaire or the style of 
particular questions or whether the sort of [0.3] issues you're asking them 
about are valid [0.4] you'll soon find out [0.7] er from that [0.9] so [0.3] er 
[0.5] piloting is really important [0.6] prepare the final questionnaire and 
then implement the survey [1.6] this is the sort of [0.2] layout 
that you might use [0.3] for [0.5] a questionnaire it's there are no [0.2] 
right and wrong answers here really [0.6] but [0.2] er [3.5] this is a layout 
[4.5] every questionnaire of course has to carry an identification number i 
think i [1.6] in the first week i was talking about using [0.3] er a 
spreadsheet [0.5] basically a a matrix to enter the data [0.9] a lot of people 
[0.3] use Excel for that [1.0] which is fine [0.4] er [0.5] the bad thing about 
Excel i think i mentioned is that it will let you sort the thing [0.7] in a 
rather rudimentary way and if you're trying to sort [0.5] your data [0.5] er 
and you [0.7] if you know in Excel [cough] [1.0] you can select [0.5] three or 
four columns with the data in it and forget to select the others and if you 
then sort it [0.3] all the data will be [1.2] out you you will [0.3] it will be 
non-consistent [0.3] things like Access [0.4] and S-P-S-S don't let you do that 
[0.4] if you're going to delete something or sort something it the whole row 
would be sorted so [0.3] Excel is quite a good database but be careful because 
you do have to [0.5] er [0.3] you do have to watch that [0.4] the ob-, [0.2] 
obviously an I-D number is one way of 
sorting things so [0.3] you sort by the order in which you collected the data 
or something [1.8] screeners [0.2] are qualifying questions and this quite 
often [0.3] er this is [1.0] quite often [0.4] important [0.2] because 
sometimes [0.4] you'll be wanting to collect data on people [0.4] who [0.3] er 
[0.4] have particular characteristics and you won't know [0.5] until you [0.5] 
er ask them whether they have those characteristics one classic example is [0.
5] and this this happens with student projects and other work we've done is [1.
8] quite often with food products you want to talk to vegetarians because [0.4] 
you think that they might [0.5] er [0.3] have well they obviously have 
different [0.2] physically they have different [0.5] purchasing habits but they 
might have different attitudes to food [0.8] but [0.3] you can't well i can't 
spot a vegetarian just by looking at him or her [0.6] [laughter] er so you need 
to ask s-, screening questions to find out [0.4] and quite often [0.3] you'll 
er you may have come across this you'll get stopped in the street and someone 
will say [0.3] you know [0.5] have you been to the cinema in the last six 
months 
if you say no they say right thanks very much [0.4] goodbye that's a it's a 
screening question [0.9] [laughter] okay so y-, [0.3] those qualifying 
questions are really important [1.8] er [1.1] i've got a a questionnaire to 
show you in a second but we'll just go through this [1.8] [cough] you need some 
introductory remarks and again this may well be a [0.2] er [0.2] a comment that 
the [0.9] the personal interviewer [0.6] makes but if it's if you're if this is 
a mail questionnaire you'll need some remarks to explain what you're doing [2.
0] it's no good just having you know first question [0.4] how old are you or 
something er you need some explanation of the work you're doing and why [0.5] 
and all market researchers do this [0.4] there is one [1.8] i suppose one 
exception to that there's a a [1.1] technique if you like called an omnibus 
survey and this is where several firms pay [0.4] to [0.3] include questions 
about their own interests on a big survey and you may [0.4] may well have come 
across these 
and these tend to be [0.3] very mixed and so [0.6] lots of introductory remarks 
about the survey are not necessarily relevant [2.3] transition questions these 
are ones that sort of take you from [0.2] one er part of the questionnaire to 
another if you're asking people about [0.3] food consumption and you're [0.2] 
you're starting off on pricing issues for example [0.3] then you might have a 
question that [0.3] er links price with the amount they buy or something and 
then you go on to [0.4] deal more [0.5] closely with the amount they buy and 
demand and so on [1.4] difficult questions [0.7] [cough] [0.4] and this is [1.
0] the textbook [0.3] er idea r-, really this depends on [0.6] er [1.1] the 
practice on the ground if you like and what you're asking but [0.4] i don't 
think you'd put difficult questions right at the top or very sensitive 
questions right at the start of the questionnaire [1.0] 
you need to distinguish questions [0.3] very clearly from instructions [0.7] 
and you need to think about [0.2] classification data about the respondent [0.
9] virtually all market research studies as you'll see [0.5] will and and 
particularly when you get into market segmentation you need information about 
the people [0.7] you're [0.3] asking you're not [0.3] you're very unlikely [0.
4] to be [0.6] researching something related to some kind of mass market [0.5] 
but you say [0.2] okay well it doesn't matter who these people are we just want 
a hundred people and we'll ask them some questions [0.8] because [0.8] by far 
ninety-nine per cent of the time you'll be saying well we need to know [0.3] 
whether older people think this and younger people think that [0.4] or people 
in the north think [0.2] one thing and people in the south think another thing 
[0.9] so those [0.5] the the classification data or the demographic data is is 
extremely important [0.5] and for for 
clustering and factronizing various other things [0.3] as you'll find out [0.4] 
this [0.2] data is is vital [2.7] there are various schools of thought on this 
er [0.4] you know there used to be big debate about how you could ask people 
their age and and [0.7] there was [0.4] sort of er [2.0] various schools of 
thought like you you didn't ask people their age that would put them off 
completely [0.5] so you just had a [0.6] er [1.5] you know you had a blank box 
and you evaluated their age yourselves [0.2] but now the [0.6] it's current [0.
2] idea seems to be you just ask people how old are you [0.8] er [0.8] same 
thing about income [0.4] that is more sensitive it's very difficult to ask 
people about incomes [0.2] so as you know you start [0.4] talking to people 
about [0.5] er [0.3] either you have a range of incomes and ask people to fill 
that in [0.5] or you talk about the occupation of the main income earner [0.7] 
so if you ask about occupation you get r-, rather more of an idea of [0.9] what 
people [1.1] earn [2.4] so allied to the [0.2] the types of 
data [0.4] we were talking about earlier [0.8] this [0.5] really helps classify 
the types of question [0.5] that [0.4] you ask [0.5] and they fall into various 
categories [0.4] there are direct factual [0.2] questions [1.7] how much do you 
earn would be one of them [1.1] you know are you male or female [0.7] how tall 
are you this kind of thing it's all very factual [0.4] er [0.5] if you think 
about it in data analysis terms [0.6] a lot of it is [1.2] quite quantitative 
by which i mean [0.4] it's it's useful in further ana-, it's it's particularly 
useful in further analysis so if you're collecting things on quantities or 
prices [0.7] then [0.3] you know as economists you'll know that that's data 
that can be used [0.5] er for other things [0.4] er personal details [0.3] if 
you're [0.6] just collecting information on [0.3] you know whether somebody's 
going to vote yes in an election or vote no in an election [0.4] it's very 
simple data it's a dummy variable but it's it's [0.3] it can be useful [1.4] 
however if you're ope-, asking open-ended questions [1.1] like [0.8] what do 
you feel about the new building [1.8] er [0.4] right [0.5] 
people could write an essay on that [0.8] er [0.4] would be very useful because 
they'd give you loads and loads of information but it would be [0.4] extremely 
difficult [0.4] to analyse [0.5] so you've got to [0.2] strike a balance [0.2] 
there is the use of the data and [0.4] how easy it will be to actually use it 
[0.5] multiple choice questions and dichotomous questions dichotomous being yes 
or no [0.5] just look at the different characteristics in those [2.5] [cough] 
so open-ended questions are great as first questions [1.2] they've still got to 
establish [0.3] if you think of th-, the questionnaire remember it's postal [0.
6] that's what we're looking at at the moment [0.6] you think of it as [0.3] 
being you s-, you as the researcher speaking to people [1.4] then you need 
something that establishes some rapport with people [1.5] and you'll see in a 
second different ways of doing that [1.3] 
so [0.3] they're they're good first questions for that reason [0.8] there's 
very little influence on the response what do you think of the new building [0.
6] is a very open question you can say exactly what you like [0.6] you can 
write as much as you like you could give a one word answer or you could [0.4] 
write an essay on it [1.5] so there's very little influence on the res-, you're 
not saying what do you think of the new building [0.4] you know good bad or 
indifferent [0.8] you're not [0.2] you're not [0.4] imposing on people [0.8] 
and so you can get [0.3] insights [0.2] however [0.9] there can be [0.2] 
interviewer bias certainly if it's a [0.4] a personal interview [0.5] but the 
pr-, main problem with open-ended questions is [0.7] we're looking at [0.4] 
quantitative methods we want to [0.4] quantify the results we therefore need [0.
2] some form of computerized analysis [0.4] and coding the things coding [0.4] 
open-ended questions [0.5] is [0.3] the main problem [0.3] that is [0.5] 
putting a number really to the question [0.2] to the sorry to the answer that 
you've been given [0.8] you can precode open-ended questions so you'd have a [0.
3] a list of 
things that you think people are going to respond but they always say [0.2] 
different things [0.7] so you you you need to [0.6] er bear that in mind you 
can [0.4] it's usually better to do it afterwards [3.5] multiple choice 
questions [0.3] dead easy they reduce [0.3] interviewer bias [0.5] very easy 
for people to [0.2] very easy and fast for people to answer [0.8] very easy for 
data processing [2.0] but the argument goes that they are [0.9] rather 
difficult to design the thing about multiple choice questions [0.5] is that you 
are forcing people into certain [0.6] answers [0.7] if you do this is a good 
reason for piloting if you have a multiple choice question [0.5] and [0.4] er 
[1.4] you pilot it you may find that people are not [0.5] they don't put the 
issue that you're asking them about into [0.2] that particular set of 
categories that you've imposed [0.3] so that's where your pilots and 
qualitative research will help [1.0] let me just show you an example of this 
[21.2] so this is a [1.5] questionnaire was actually done out of this course a 
couple of years ago [0.3] and it was to try to 
ask [0.6] er [0.3] customers of a farm shop [0.2] what they thought of the [0.
7] er outlet they were visiting [0.6] and we had a screening question because 
[0.4] er [0.3] it's not actually on there but we had a screening process 
because [0.2] we wanted to interview customers at the farm shop and non-
customers so there was a [0.7] er [0.6] a screener for that but [0.2] these [0.
3] are [0.4] basically multiple choice questions of various sorts [2.1] here's 
one thinking about your visits to the shop do you visit at specific times of 
the year [0.3] and there were [0.4] different options [0.2] and it's multiple 
choice now if you're [0.2] asking do you visit at specific times of the year [1.
4] summer autumn winter spring there are no other options [0.5] er [0.2] oh 
except for all the year round [1.2] so [0.8] you know that's a a a relatively 
simple example [0.9] er [2.4] we said thinking about your visits to the shop do 
you [0.2] more often than not visit at specific times of the day [0.4] morning 
lunchtime afternoon [0.4] now [0.4] for all we knew they might come in the 
middle of the night [0.6] so we had [0.4] a category called other and this is 
this is the sort of [0.7] 
p-, a er a pilot would find out if people did unusual things or [0.3] did 
things that were not [0.3] listed on here [1.2] er [0.3] what form of transport 
did you use [1.3] car bus taxi foot bicycle [0.4] or other [0.3] so other in 
multiple choice questions other is obviously a catch-all [0.4] er if you find 
everyone's ticking other [0.3] then you've designed the thing badly [0.8] 
because you haven't [0.4] obviously identified the right [0.8] answers that 
people are going to give and this again is where piloting and so on will [0.6] 
er help [4.1] the other thing is about bias [0.8] and it's said that [0.4] if 
[0.4] you offer people options [1.9] er [0.2] the order you put them in does 
make a difference [0.2] now this is a [0.3] this is all sort of fairly [0.2] 
straightforward data i don't know if we can find [1.2] something else [1.8] 
okay how did you hear about the existence of the shop [0.4] well on the radio 
from friends newsp-, now if they're trying to think about oh how did i [0.3] 
hear about this [0.7] you need to be careful about biasing the survey [0.3] 
because of the order these are in and people might oh radio yeah [0.4] 
i'll put radio down [1.1] okay and there's there's there's various ways of 
getting round this and one is simply to [0.4] randomize the order and have 
different [0.2] questionnaires with different orders [0.6] where do you do your 
main food shopping for the week [0.7] again [0.2] the the order may well be 
important [8.4] dichotomous questions this is yes or no male or female whatever 
[1.1] er very easy [1.9] coding is very simple and it offers you the 
possibility of [0.6] er [0.4] using dummy variables in this [3.1] so [0.4] you 
can isolate how males and how females think about things [0.4] but [0.5] with 
some issues the it may not be seen in this dichotomous way it may not be [0.6] 
er an issue of [0.4] er either or [1.0] and the wording becomes very important 
[0.5] in order to to get the right sort of response [0.4] just [1.1] one thing 
i just forgot [0.7] while we're talking about multiple choice questions [0.8] 
the analysis and coding of multiple choice questions is really crucial [1.2] 
because [0.3] if you're thinking about [2.1] the [0.7] variables [1.7] remember 
[0.6] you're putting this into a spreadsheet or into some sort of analysis 
package [0.3] and you've got variables and the variable has got to [0.4] 
identify [0.3] each of the bits of data that you're dealing with [2.4] and if i 
just take one of these [1.3] says where do you do your main food shopping for 
the week [0.2] or month that's a very deliberate question because [0.4] we felt 
[0.3] that there should only be one answer to that [0.3] where do you do your 
main food shopping [0.4] but if we'd said [0.2] where do you do your food 
shopping [1.8] then these people could quite easily have ticked more than one 
answer [0.7] and indeed they did even though we put the word main in there [1.
2] so you then come up with a problem [0.5] because [1.0] the question [0.7] 
arises what is the variable here [2.3] if we had one variable [0.3] to cover [0.
4] main food shopping so we'd call it main food shop or something [0.3] as the 
variable name [0.6] then you'd enter a number [1.0] dependent on which one of 
these they ticked [0.5] but if they ticked two you're in real problems because 
[0.5] you can't [0.6] if if you've just got the one variable about main food 
shopping and then say i do my main shop-, 
food shopping in Asda and Waitrose [1.7] then you can't interpret that [0.5] 
and this is a key thing about multiple choice questions is that you [0.5] need 
to decide whether it's tick one or tick more than one [0.7] and if it's tick 
more than one [0.4] then each of these has to become a variable [2.0] and if 
you're doing this later on it's really important to to get that difference 
right [0.7] you you sometimes see people do [0.3] what [0.7] what are really 
rather silly things like [0.8] if if it's a a tick once so this is one variable 
called main food shopping [1.3] you then you you see people [0.3] trying to [1.
3] create a number so right we'll say number seven [0.3] we'll call it number 
seven if they tick Tesco and Asda [1.6] right and then we'll call it number 
eight if they tick Asda and Sainsbury but then what if they tick three [0.3] 
and so on it just gets out of hand so if [0.8] there's a possibility in a 
multiple choice answer of them ticking more than one box you need to [0.3] 
create [0.5] five [0.2] variables [0.3] and we've got some rather horrendous [1.
2] things here [1.7] please 
indicate [0.5] where you shop for the bulk [0.3] your needs for the following 
products [0.2] there's an awful lot of data [0.3] that can be collected in a 
table like that [0.7] and again [0.6] as long as people only tick one we're 
we're all right but of course each of these is a variable [1.0] they start 
ticking more than them then each cell [0.4] becomes a variable [0.6] and you 
get [0.6] you can get very [0.6] confused and get an awful lot of variables [5.
8] now there are lots of problems obviously in asking people questions [4.2] 
they relate to things like sensitivity [0.5] is the issue a tricky one [3.3] 
they relate to the complexity of the questions [1.7] they relate to the 
applicability of the questions can people answer them [0.7] they relate to 
length [1.0] so [0.2] the length of the questions themselves and the c-, the 
length of the questionnaire [0.4] is [0.3] an issue [1.1] and then [0.7] as 
you'll see [0.3] asking people hypothetical questions may be something that 
they're not very good at [0.4] dealing with [0.5] and [0.4] asking people [0.2] 
leading questions [0.4] as you'll see can bias your results [2.7] to help avoid 
this there's a little list of things [0.5] that you need to avoid [1.0] follow 
you want simple words you want clear words avoid things like leading people 
biasing people [0.7] implicit assumptions like assuming somebody knows 
something [0.6] er which they may not [1.6] 
unnecessary estimation [0.6] double-barrelled questions and so on [1.5] you'll 
see some examples of this now [0.4] so [4.9] you need [0.3] to be specific [0.
2] that still on [3.0] what was that [2.2] would you here's here's a question 
would you support increased taxes to pay for educational programmes for your 
children [1.9] now [0.4] the trouble with this [0.3] topic if you like is it's 
it's more of an art than a science and it's very easy to say here are some 
precise rules about how you do it [1.0] er [1.0] but [1.6] it is an art and and 
that looks a perfectly good question [1.3] but [1.4] and and in some ways 
because it's an art you can go too far you could make this extremely precise or 
you could leave it relatively vague like this [0.3] but some would say that's a 
bit open-ended [0.5] increased taxes well how much [1.4] you could be a bit 
more specific [0.4] i mean that also says increased taxes that could be 
somebody else's [3.6] anybody explain where that's coming from [laughter] 
ss: [0.5] 
nm0976: what this thing [0.3] 
ss: 
nm0976: oh you think that's my [0.4] well that's 
ss: 
nm0976: gosh you can do far 
more exciting things than that you can have a [laughter] gunshot going off or 
something [laughter] [0.3] er [0.5] well sorry about that but [0.5] you'll have 
to put with it [0.6] these [0.4] er P-Cs are too [1.3] efficient [0.5] er [1.1] 
so there's a little bit more [1.1] it's a little bit more specific would you 
support an increase in your taxes to pay for education programmes for your 
children [2.2] [laughter] i'm sorry i'm going to have to turn that off [0.7] 
can't cope with that [0.9] what is it it's in 
ss: 
nm0976: eh 
ss: 
nm0976: where is it
ss: [laughter] 
nm0976: says no sound look 
ss: [0.5] 
sm0977: turn the volume off [0.5] 
nm0976: we could probably do that in a minute 
sm0978: 
nm0976: actually you can do volume here look [3.1] should do [1.4] sorry about 
that [2.6] there we go [1.0] er [0.5] so [1.4] be s-, be relatively specific [1.
2] you need to know your respondents' ability to answer the sort of questions 
you're asking [0.5] and the context [2.6] that [0.2] is a very [0.5] is a 
question that's very dear to my heart but it might not mean a lot to you i 
don't know [0.9] the Dearing Committee was the body that a year ago [0.3] 
reviewed higher education for the Higher Education Funding Council of 
England [0.3] now i know that but [0.2] you might not [0.3] and your 
respondents might not [4.1] you need to be specific about time and this is 
something that [0.4] quite often [0.2] you're asking people questions about 
things they've done well you [0.7] very very often asking people questions 
about things they've done [1.3] so you need to be specific [2.5] again there's 
a fine line between being specific and being either [0.4] you know overlong or 
being patronizing [0.7] but how often did you exercise [0.3] in the past week 
[0.2] start with today's date and count back seven days some would say well i 
know what a week is thank you [0.4] [laughter] and i can count that but [1.1] 
get the idea [1.7] that is a totally [0.4] inappropriate question [0.9] because 
you're asking people [0.3] a question which really relies on you know enormous 
memory and [0.4] you know er [0.2] how would they [0.2] work that out but you 
see this sort of thing [3.4] again on this fine line between being [0.2] 
overspecific and being er being too long and being too brief [0.6] here's one 
place of residence well you could be a bit [1.0] more specific about that 
what's the name of the city where you currently live [0.7] er [0.3] these open-
ended things accim-, accidents among children are [0.4] you might want to be [0.
4] more specific [0.3] and er indicating agreement with a statement or 
something is [0.5] er a better way of doing that [2.2] here's another one for 
you [1.2] in your view does the [0.2] U-O-R provide a service worthy of the 
fees you pay [1.5] well of course that relates to the Union of Railworkers [0.
5] but you may have thought it was relating to the University of Reading [0.2] 
you need to be [0.8] specific [2.5] and this is something you must [0.2] have 
views on [6.8] right i know what this means because [0.2] i've sort of been 
involved in [0.9] educational research and stuff [0.4] but er you might prefer 
[0.4] should each module tutor conduct a review of how students feel the course 
has gone each term [0.4] it's the sa-, it's exactly the same question but [0.3] 
you've got to phrase it in a way [0.5] that people understand if you were 
asking [0.4] this if this questionnaire was aimed at a load of educational 
specialists [0.2] no problem [3.9] this is 
a classic sort of loaded question many prominent people have publicly admitted 
they've sought help for problems relating to alcohol abuse [0.5] what about you 
[1.5] [laughter] okay [0.4] it's a very [1.6] i'll give you another example [0.
7] this is a very famous one [1.9] er it's out of a [0.2] ninety-fifties 
article called [0.2] asking the embarrassing question [1.2] or the loaded 
question [1.9] and just just to give you the context one virtually can 
guarantee meaningless responses by direst-, [0.2] directly [0.3] asking 
questions such as have you ever defaulted on a credit account [0.4] do you 
smoke pot at least once a week [0.5] [laughter] or have you ever been involved 
in an unreported [0.2] car accident [1.2] right they're stupid questions people 
aren't going to [0.7] er [1.6] respond to them [0.3] but Alan Barton it says 
here Alan Barton made the point best in ninety-fifty-eight when he [0.7] posed 
the following [0.3] parody on ways to ask the question did you kill your wife 
[1.7] [laughter] and the first approach that you might take to asking that 
question is the casual approach [1.4] which is [1.0] do you happen 
to have murdered your wife [2.0] [laughter] the second approach is multiple 
choice [1.8] [laughter] would you please read off the number on this card which 
[0.2] corresponds to what became of your wife [0.6] [laughter] you hand the 
card to the respondents and the card has one [0.3] natural death [0.8] 
[laughter] two i killed her [0.5] [laughter] and three other [0.7] [laughter] 
whatever other might be [1.6] you could [0.3] have the sort of er [0.2] peer 
group [0.2] approach [0.6] where you say to you you ask you say to people [0.4] 
or you say to the respondent [0.7] as you know many people have been killing 
their wives recently [0.7] [laughter] do you happen to have killed yours [1.7] 
[laughter] er [2.2] and another other people approach would see [0.2] do you 
know any people who've murdered their wives and how about yourself [1.7] 
[laughter] er [0.5] and then finally it says stare firmly into the respondent's 
eyes ask in simple clear cut language [0.3] such as that to which the 
respondent is accustomed and with an air of assuming that everyone's done 
everything [0.5] do you ever kill your wife [1.1] [laughter] so [0.5] 
[laughter] [0.4] there are different ways of asking sensitive questions [1.4] 
so on controversial subjects for example if you're talking to farmers about 
their [0.3] attitudes to convers-, conservation [0.8] it's not particularly [0.
6] 
er [0.7] approachable to say how many kilometres of hedges have you taken out 
in the past five years [0.7] so you might do this sort of thing it's the same 
idea as [0.3] did you kill your wife [0.8] please describe your policy for 
hedgerow removal [4.2] you've got to be as clear as possible again without 
going over the top [0.5] daily newspapers read regularly [0.4] is a bit vague 
[0.5] you might want to [0.5] specify [0.6] read or glanced through most days 
of the week [0.5] you've got to adapt this question to how people [0.3] deal 
with this kind of issue so [0.3] m-, maybe people you think maybe people just 
have a c-, a quick glance at the paper and you'd call that reading [0.3] fine 
[1.4] you could get even more specific do you read regularly any daily 
newspaper at least three out of [0.2] and so on [1.8] but you've got to be 
clear [3.8] if you're asking somebody about their [0.8] employment [0.3] their 
job [2.6] just saying is yours an interesting job or a routine job [0.6] might 
well [0.6] er [1.6] you might well find people a bit [0.6] unhappy about 
answering that so you could [0.3] ask it another way is yours a job in which 
you do a lot of hard thinking or a job which [0.5] once you've learned it you 
always know 
how to do it [0.8] it's a sort of flavour to how you ask this sort of question 
you might argue that the answer you get from [0.4] from those two would be 
rather different but [0.4] you get the idea you've got to ask the question in a 
way that people will [1.6] be prepared to answer it [3.0] this is used [0.3] 
consistently in advertising [0.8] prestige buyers in advertising or prestige in 
advertising is used as a m-, [0.3] a major selling point obviously [1.0] so 
doctors are always seen advertising headache remedies [1.9] er [0.4] sports 
stars are always seen promoting sports drinks and so on [0.8] but [0.5] it 
works against you if you're s-, trying to get [0.4] unbiased responses from 
people so doctors say that increased fibre is good for your health do you agree 
well [1.7] [laugh] [1.1] this week is probably not the week to talk about this 
after [0.8] the Harold Shipman case [0.2] er [0.4] doctors say that a quick 
injection is good for you do you agree [1.6] [laughter] er [0.6] have you 
increased the fibre content of your diet over the last few months [1.2] would 
be another way of putting it [0.7] and if you 
wanted to be really vague about it [0.2] have you changed your shopping habits 
over the last few months due to health concerns [0.4] what products have you 
been buying more of if somebody says [0.3] i've been buying loads more [0.4] 
products with fibre in them then you've really got them you've really got a [0.
3] a valid answer there [0.2] so [0.4] the first one would certainly [0.4] bias 
people's responses and and the others might be [0.3] better [1.9] now this is 
another [0.4] one of the most famous [0.8] areas in which [0.2] well in Britain 
anyway in which [0.6] sort of market research gets [0.2] condescending and 
patronizing is in tax returns [0.5] the Inland Revenue [0.5] these days you 
actually have to sort of do it yourself as well it's self-assessment [0.5] but 
they send you forms and these forms [0.4] are [1.7] sort of aimed at [2.5] sort 
of five year olds i think because they they [0.6] speak to you basically [0.4] 
they're they're not done if anyone i don't know if anyone's filled in a tax 
return [0.4] but they're not [1.2] they're not er [1.7] just [1.0] full of 
information they're not f-, just far too long but [0.6] part of the 
length is due to the fact that they're trying to explain things to you to the 
sort of nth degree [0.5] and so you get things like this this is a [0.4] a [0.
4] a th-, the the sort of spirit of it [0.7] you could say [0.4] instead of 
machinery purchased before grant ninety-seven [0.4] please indicate below the 
approximate value of any major items of machinery [0.9] before grant what the 
tax return approach is [0.8] says [0.3] in the question below i'm asking you to 
think back over the past [0.2] the tax return talks to you as if it's a person 
or a friend of yours it's dreadful [0.4] it says now i would like you to turn 
the page [0.9] well if i've got to the bottom of the page i probably would have 
worked that out for myself [0.5] in the question below i'm asking you to think 
back [0.3] and so on [1.1] er [0.2] so you s-, you just see the differences [2.
2] this is the double-barrelled thing did you drink coffee with lunch and tea 
yesterday [0.4] do you mean with lunch and tea or do you mean with lunch or tea 
[0.4] or do you mean did you drink coffee with lunch and did you 
drink coffee with tea [3.2] at tea [1.4] er avoid embarrassing questions 
obviously [0.3] [laughter] or at least find a way of asking them [1.2] so a 
sort of summary [0.2] of the way you can [0.5] design these questions [1.5] 
they've got to be simple you've got this in front of you they've got to be 
simple [0.2] direct familiar [0.4] words used should be clear specific avoid 
ambiguity [0.7] cover one point with one question so don't say are you 
satisfied with the cost and convenience of this product you've got to [0.4] ask 
that separately [1.3] avoid [0.2] leading or loaded questions and [0.2] emo-, 
emotional questions find ways of asking them [0.4] if you can't ask them in the 
questionnaire then [0.3] you maybe have to resort to qualitative research [0.6] 
which we'll look at in a minute some other ways of collecting that data [1.1] 
short questions that are applicable to respondents avoid very complex 
instructions [0.3] and various sorts of bias [0.7] check and recheck the length 
of it [0.8] people are naturally going to be put off by anything very long it 
depends who they are what you're asking them 
about [0.8] and make sure it reads well and it's presented well as i say i 
don't think these days there's any excuse for poor presentation of [0.5] 
questionnaires because we've all [0.4] more or less got the tools to do it [0.
2] properly [2.0] so i think it's important it does affect response rate [0.9] 
if you it depends of course what you're asking but sort of consumer research if 
you get a response rate from a [0.2] postal questionnaire of ten per cent 
you're relatively happy [1.7] doesn't sound a lot but [0.4] you're relatively 
happy with that [0.2] if it's up to sort of twenty or twenty-five that's pretty 
good [2.0] i think we'll take a short break there are there any questions [0.7] 
take a short break and come back to how you'd code this and i'll give you some 
other examples before we look at [0.5] qualitative research [12.2] 
right just to finish off the discussion of questionnaires we [1.8] have 
collected the data let's assume that [3.0] when i first [0.4] [laugh] [0.4] 
when i first arrived here [0.2] some years ago [0.6] there was a unit called 
the data processing unit in our department [0.7] and they still operated [0.5] 
or there was one at that time there was one P-C in fact it was a Macintosh in 
the department [1.6] and i think it had [1.0] it had a hundred-and-twenty-eight 
K of [0.6] RAM or something [1.1] er [1.0] anyway [1.2] there was the data 
processing unit and they they still operated with punched cards [0.6] and quite 
a lot of the terminology of [0.2] market research comes from [0.5] that [0.7] 
that er [0.6] period and you still got talk about people punching data in [0.6] 
which is [0.3] entering data in [0.7] common parlance but these punch cards 
were [0.3] exactly that little cards with holes in them [0.9] er [0.3] and i 
remember seeing them do do a sort on this data so you had [0.3] a hundred cards 
each of which represented a respondent [0.5] and the sorting process if you 
wanted to [0.4] take out the males or the females er [0.2] was more or 
less a s-, [0.3] a simplification but it [0.3] it more or less involved 
sticking a sort of needle through [0.5] the the hole that represented male [0.
2] and all the female cards dropped out and you had the [0.6] the male cards 
were hanging on this little pole [0.7] er [1.1] nowadays we're a bit more 
sophisticated than that as you know [0.9] but it is important to get the 
questionnaire properly coded it's very important that [0.4] the [0.3] as i i 
mentioned with respect to multiple choice questions [0.4] er it's very 
important that [0.2] the data is entered correctly [1.5] er [0.2] and in a way 
that can be [0.7] relatively easily understood [0.5] and when we looked at S-P-
S-S in the first week [0.7] i said things like making sure the variable names 
are sensible [0.3] making sure the descriptions of those variables are then 
even more sensible so you can [0.4] remember and understand what you're 
analysing is v-, very important [0.7] var one to var twenty is not actually 
very useful for anybody [1.6] but multiple choice and factual questions 
basically [0.2] code themselves as you've seen [1.5] er [8.4] you've got little 
coding [0.7] numbers in there and that's quite standard on a questionnaire [0.
3] and they they code themselves and you use those numbers [0.3] in this case 
[0.4] er [1.2] again if it's if it's a single answer in this case that will 
just be a number representing [0.3] that answer it's simply a label it's 
nominal data [4.4] factual questions code themselves [0.2] how many kilometres 
of hedges have you removed [0.6] they just give you a number [0.6] open-ended 
[0.3] as i said they need a coding frame in advance or [0.3] ex-post codings 
after you've got all the [0.3] results in you sort things into categories [0.5] 
with open-ended questions and indeed with qualitative data there are [0.2] bits 
of software that can help you with this there's a thing called Nudist you may 
have come across [0.4] which is for classifying qualitative data [0.8] largely 
for classifying [0.5] data which is in the form of [0.6] er transcriptions of 
recordings interviews focus groups or whatever [1.2] and what Nudist basically 
does is pick out [0.6] key words and organise them in a sort of hierarchy [0.8] 
to try to 
establish what are the things that are most important to people [1.9] 
dichotomous use basically done in variables ones or zeros [1.4] er [0.9] so 
there's the questionnaire [0.4] you'll see [0.8] just remind you of the things 
that we [0.5] were asking [0.3] so you've got [0.8] the questionnaire number 
the interviewer the date the time [0.5] er how far have you travelled what form 
of transport did you use [0.3] what that looks like [2.3] is that when you 
collect [0.6] remember each [0.3] row is a [0.4] an observation each row is a 
person [0.4] so you've got code number name date time [0.3] and then you have 
to start getting into these [0.2] variable names which [0.5] i think it it 
ought to be the next [0.7] innovation in computing i think [0.4] is that they 
ought to be able to let variable names go over eight letters and S-P-S-S [0.5] 
the next versions i think should work on that [0.2] because [0.2] how far and 
transport and [0.8] M-U-M-U-eighteen [2.5] which must be number of [0.5] can't 
even remember 
ss: 
nm0976: number of people under eighteen with yeah okay so [0.7] mm [0.5] it was 
a few years ago but you do 
forget and and you need to try and keep those as sensible as possible [0.5] but 
as i mentioned [0.4] it's [0.8] variables across the top [0.4] observations 
down the side [0.5] er and then you'll be [1.1] er [1.8] safe in in analysing 
this [0.3] see some ninety-nines in there that's missing data [0.8] as long as 
ninety-nine is not a valid observation you can use something like ninety-nine 
[0.4] for missing data [0.3] S-P-S-S incidentally [0.4] prefers you to use a [0.
4] er full stop [0.3] for missing data [1.0] you could always get Excel to 
change the ninety-nines to full stops [0.6] again i think this is probably 
harking back to the old punch card days when i think minus-ninety-nine was the 
thing that they used [0.4] as something that would be unlikely to occur 
anywhere else [0.6] and so all the variables are across there [1.2] there was 
one [1.4] er [0.3] open-ended question and and you see they've [1.2] the 
researchers have noted down [0.2] the [0.3] responses basically to the open-
ended question but that needs some sort of post [0.5] er analysis [7.8] i'm not 
going to c-, this is [0.3] part of this presentation but 
namex was basically talking to you about this last time [0.4] scaling being 
used to estimate [0.3] the extent of somebody's predisposition to act or their 
attitude [0.7] er [0.3] and [0.6] i think you covered that [2.2] are there any 
[0.3] questions on how you [0.5] ask questions [5.6] right we'll move on and in 
some ways this is moving back [0.2] because [0.5] er [2.5] what i want to talk 
about now is [0.5] qualitative [0.4] getting getting hold of qualitative 
information [4.1] there are [0.3] a number of different ways these aren't in 
your notes but i will add them to the web site [1.1] there are a number of ways 
[0.5] does anyone get frustrated with this paperclip by the way [0.7] 
ss: mm [0.7] 
sm0985: 
nm0976: it needs to be turned off and [1.3] i never know how to do it so i'll 
just get it out of the way [10.6] er [2.4] qualitative research as i say [0.3] 
is quite often used as a precursor to quantitative research [2.9] partly to 
reassure yourself that you're asking the right questions [0.8] so you use [0.2] 
qualitative research in a in an exploratory way [0.7] and [0.3] it helps to 
sort of frame the [0.2] types of questions you're going to ask [6.9] there 
are essentially three [0.2] broad methods [0.5] of [0.6] or broad schools of 
thought with respect to qualitative research [0.4] and by far the most 
important method [0.4] and of course these are sort of [0.6] er themes as well 
is the whole [0.3] idea surrounding [0.3] focus groups [0.3] and focus groups 
are by far these days by far the most [0.5] er [1.1] used [0.9] form of 
qualitative research [0.6] but you also [2.2] hear of with y-, the-, there are 
also [0.8] there's also the possibility of conducting depth interviews [3.7] 
which i'll say a little bit about in a moment and then there's a a [1.1] area 
of research called motivational research [4.6] which in some ways can be used 
[0.5] as part of these two [2.9] so we'll just deal with [0.5] we'll deal with 
these first get them out of the way and then talk about focus groups [2.9] just 
to repeat the [0.5] objective of carrying out [0.5] er [1.2] qualitative 
research [0.4] is [0.2] really to generate ideas [0.8] things like [0.5] 
background information on a problem or a topic [1.7] identifying concepts so 
concept identification i will as i said [0.5] put some notes up that refer to 
this [1.7] identifying relevant behaviour patterns and themes in the way 
people's b-, people behave [1.3] establishing priorities how people [0.5] 
rate certain things or how important things are to people in a qualitative way 
[1.0] preliminary screening focus groups and qualitative research are used a 
lot [0.3] in [0.2] screening product ideas [3.1] new product development as 
you'll hear from namex in due course is a [0.7] [laugh] [0.7] is a sort of 
inexact science in that they use very detailed scientific methods [0.7] er but 
[0.3] it's said in the food industry that eighty per cent of new product 
introductions fail [0.9] er now not all of those will reach the [0.2] the 
retailer [0.4] Marks and Spencer's are [0.5] famous for example of actually not 
test marketing [0.8] Marks and Spencer's basically test market by putting [0.2] 
products in store [1.0] and so [0.2] new product ideas like [0.4] er [0.7] M 
and S are famous for ready meals and so on they they basically put them in 
store see how they [0.3] go and if they're no good they pull them again [0.7] 
so there's as it it's a relatively [0.4] er [0.5] inexact science [0.9] but a 
lot of products fail [2.0] focus groups however are used sorry [0.6] er 
qualitative research [0.3] however is used to try 
to [0.4] er ensure that that doesn't happen [0.3] so screening of products [0.
3] and concept testing is very important [0.4] er area [1.0] of this [0.7] also 
post research investigations in other words to sort of back up the results of a 
survey [0.4] you might well conduct some further qualitative research [1.2] 
piloting as i mentioned [0.3] my pilot [0.4] questionnaires during the 
qualitative phase [1.1] and as i also said [0.8] er talking about personal 
issues and personal questions [0.4] they will be easier to do with some form of 
qualitative research [0.6] now [0.6] depth interviews just to get them out of 
the way [0.2] depth interviews are exactly as they sound [0.5] er [1.7] 
relatively long [0.4] relatively [0.4] er [1.2] well very personal in other 
words it's just one person plus the interviewer [0.7] trying to uncover 
people's often people's motivations people's attitudes [0.4] and so on [0.4] 
highly expensive of course 'cause it's very intensive you need a [0.4] highly 
trained interviewer to do it to do it [0.3] and extremely difficult to evaluate 
[0.4] the consequences because [0.4] each respondent basically has a [0.4] a 
write-up of a rather [0.4] conventionally rather long discussion [0.6] so depth 
interviews [0.3] i think to 
some extent are [0.4] waning in in er [1.0] popularity amongst market 
researchers [0.8] focus groups are not [0.6] the Blair government [0.5] er [0.
4] has popularized focus group use in the U-K [0.6] in the sense that they were 
very [0.6] er [0.4] open about having used focus groups to try to find out what 
sort of image they ought to put across [0.3] so things like image [0.6] image 
of a political party is something that lends itself very well [0.4] to a focus 
group discussion [2.2] a focus group and i'll show you two examples in a moment 
[0.6] is [2.8] usually a relatively small number of people [0.5] between [0.2] 
six and ten [1.0] eight being the [0.3] probably the optimum in most cases [7.
2] participants are brought together [0.4] under the direction of a [0.3] group 
leader of some sort [0.9] er [1.7] a trained person who is usually [0.4] 
referred to as the moderator [0.5] of the focus group [2.4] in fact to call 
them the leader is probably wrong [0.7] they are the moderator they're trying 
to moderate a discussion between [0.8] eight people [1.0] and [0.2] moderation 
means that they shouldn't really be [0.4] too involved in it ideally [0.6] a 
good 
focus group would [1.1] last for an hour and a half and the moderator wouldn't 
n-, need to intervene at all [0.8] that doesn't [0.4] often happen because 
there needs to be some introduction there needs to be some direction [0.4] as 
you'll see in a second [1.7] the group [0.5] the m-, the moderator [0.2] should 
be just that they shouldn't intervene in the discussion they're not [0.3] there 
to be part of the discussion [0.8] quite often [0.6] other members of a 
research team want to be involved in the focus group they'll say oh i'll sit in 
[0.6] but that [0.3] can distort the discussion as well it s-, [0.4] it should 
be very genuinely a [0.3] an independent discussion between eight [0.3] people 
who are [0.4] er [0.8] genuine respondents [4.9] the leader has various sorry 
the moderator has various [0.4] er functions [1.1] the moderator has got to [0.
2] make sure the discussion follows the route [0.5] that it's supposed to [0.3] 
but [1.0] they need to do this in a relatively subtle way [0.6] we did some 
work as you'll see [0.8] looking at [0.8] the attitudes of consumers to British 
meat products [1.6] er now [0.7] we were actually 
looking at the attitudes of Belgian consumers to British meat products [0.6] er 
for the Meat and Livestock Commission [0.3] who [0.4] at the time of the B-S-E 
[0.4] the height of the B-S-E affair were facing [0.4] an export ban on beef 
and therefore were looking at [0.5] the [0.4] er prospects for other [0.9] 
products like [0.5] er lamb and pork so we were looking particularly at those 
products [1.2] er [2.2] we didn't [0.7] we or the the research team did not go 
straight into a focus group and say right we're going to talk about British 
meat [1.7] because what we wanted to do was to get people's confidence and to 
build up [0.4] their [0.3] er or build up rapport with them so er okay they 
knew it was about food consumption [0.6] er [0.2] what you ideally want in a 
focus group [0.3] is for people to lead you [0.7] so if you're the moderator 
and there's a group of people [0.5] chatting away about something and somebody 
says [0.5] oh i'm not very keen on British meat [1.4] that is your cue to bring 
them in and to s-, start the [0.2] the subject going on rather than saying 
right it's [0.4] you know it's half past twelve now we're going to talk about 
British meat [0.4] you want 
to let people [0.5] er [0.8] guide you in some ways and the and the skill of 
the moderator's in recognizing those signs and making sure that [0.4] er 
they're picked up on and the the discussion is [0.5] er [0.7] or follows a [0.
2] a [0.6] particular course [2.4] focus groups are popular for lots of [0.7] 
perfectly valid reasons [1.3] in some ways they're relatively cheap [2.2] 
certainly compared with individual interviews it's relatively cheap to get 
eight people together [0.3] even so [0.5] the going rate at the moment for [0.
7] participation in focus group is about twenty-five quid [0.5] we're trying to 
recruit some people at the moment and [0.3] twenty-five quid [0.4] is er [0.3] 
seen as [0.8] a reasonable rate to pay people for a [0.3] couple of hours of 
their time [0.3] if you're doing this for a professional agency you probably 
also [0.5] pay travel expenses and so on [0.4] you've got to [0.4] hire a [0.4] 
facility [1.1] there's one in Reading called Sight and Sound [0.5] typical 
facility would be [0.6] probably about the a room about this size but [0.3] 
from here to the wall would be split off [0.4] and there'd be a big [0.5] er 
single 
way mirror [0.4] in the wall [0.5] and [0.2] the research group can sit behind 
the mirror [0.4] and observe what's going on in the [0.3] in the room sometimes 
video is used m-, more often than not [0.4] video is used either in addition to 
that or instead of it [0.9] so focus groups are [0.4] tape recorded they're 
videoed [0.4] and [0.5] er this this facility in Reading is extremely good and 
you can [0.3] you can watch as a member of the research team [0.6] market 
research code of ethics [0.5] says that people have to be informed [0.2] that 
the research team is sitting behind the mirror [0.9] er which i think is fair 
enough and [0.7] as as the [0.6] moderator says this they say oh [0.4] you know 
you ought to know that behind that wall there's a few people there obser-, a-, 
and [0.7] focus group goes completely quiet and oh my God you know can't [0.3] 
you know can't put up with that and within five minutes they've completely 
forgotten about it [0.4] as is as they've forgotten about the fact they're 
being videoed [0.9] er [0.7] and then after two hours you sort of introduce 
yourselves to them and like 
oh yeah i forgot about you [0.9] er [1.8] focus groups [1.1] have [0.2] these 
important advantages [0.3] the main advantage of a focus group over an 
individual [0.2] interview is that [0.5] there is [0.5] interaction [0.9] 
people stimulate ideas off each other [1.5] and that is the main [0.8] er [0.5] 
the main advantage people are [0.3] interacting with each other it's very 
dynamic [0.3] they can [0.5] er [0.6] prompt each other they can decide [1.0] 
er [0.7] sorry they can they can er [0.2] grou or the group dynamic means that 
the [1.1] er information you gain tends to be richer [2.7] it fosters 
creativity [1.1] and they start thinking provided it's well moderated [0.2] 
there's nothing worse than a focus group that is [0.4] er [1.6] badly mor-, 
moderated i want to show you [0.3] two examples one that i consider is 
reasonable and one that's [0.5] er not so good [0.8] er [1.4] but [0.2] yeah 
the m-, the moderator is there to guide it [0.2] moderator's also there to 
bring people out who are not [0.7] participating [0.3] or [0.4] to [0.4] shut 
somebody up who is participating too much [0.4] and it's a question of [0.3] 
trying to get the views of everybody [1.4] good focus group [0.3] spontaneity 
candour 
can produce really good results [0.5] after the focus group you need to write 
the thing up it needs a [0.4] either a full transcription or some kind of 
summary of it [0.4] er [1.3] the [0.2] the people who did this work in Belgium 
were [0.3] they in fact conducted ten focus groups five in the French speaking 
part [0.5] of Belgium five in the English speaking part [0.2] sorry in the 
Flemish speaking part [0.6] and [0.4] er [2.5] the write-up of ten focus groups 
is [0.3] not a trivial task these things some of them lasted three hours [0.4] 
so [0.4] it's it's [0.2] it's a fairly large [0.3] er undertaking [0.3] but [0.
2] the information you can get is very rich [0.4] what you can't say is that we 
conducted ten focus groups [0.3] there were eight people in each one and 
therefore [0.3] er we've got eighty respondents and that's a valid sample and 
you start doing statistical analysis that is not the idea [0.6] it's 
exploratory only it's [0.2] giving ideas and the output that they this group 
produced [0.5] for the Meat and Livestock Commission were [0.4] just basic 
ideas on how [0.3] you might market [0.3] British [0.7] er [0.9] lamb and pork 
in 
Belgium [1.4] i'll show you first of all what [0.2] i think is not the best 
example [0.4] er of how to conduct a focus group [0.4] can you [0.3] namex can 
you pull that blind right down and could you pull [0.4] those blinds down as 
well please [55.7] 
nm0976: right now i can't see what is happening so [laughter] [35.8] 
nm0976: that was inspired timing they start talking about S-P-S-S [0.4] this 
was er [0.3] work that was conducted actually for Microsoft [1.3] trying to 
find out i think this w-, one is in Birmingham you probably [0.2] judge by the 
accents in a minute [0.7] er [0.6] and it was trying to find out what people [0.
2] thought of Microsoft software and it was a couple of years ago so some of 
it's a bit [0.8] a bit dated [10.5] you'll find [0.3] i think that the room 
looks a bit cramped it's not [0.2] an ideal location [0.6] and i don't know if 
i've picked out the right bit but you'll [0.4] you'll find that the moderator 
[0.2] i think tends to be very [0.3] intrusive and [0.3] he certainly at points 
leads the respondents on [0.5] and it's more like a question and answer session 
really than a discussion [8.8] 
this is the moderator standing at the front bit like a sort of school teacher 
[0.2] writing things up on a [0.7] er [0.6] flipchart [16.2] but you find that 
[0.2] each time [0.3] one of them talks they're talking to the moderator which 
is not the idea at all they should be talking to each other [12.6] moderator 
has a rather tedious voice as well which doesn't i think help [12.4] but that's 
a sort of typical scene [0.4] little rules simple things like you don't [1.9] 
it's better not to serve alcohol [1.5] because after two or three hours 
particularly with groups of men [1.0] er you tend to get slightly [1.2] excited 
[0.2] respondents and it doesn't necessarily ne-, [0.2] lead to good answers [0.
8] focus groups with men are [0.5] decidedly more difficult than focus groups 
with women particularly on food [0.6] er [0.6] what we found [0.6] with this 
Belgium work for example we were looking at [0.5] among other things we were 
looking at ready meals [1.5] and [0.4] we were asking for people's impressions 
[0.2] of [0.3] packages of [0.2] ready meal [0.3] pork and and lamb [0.8] and 
er [2.2] women [1.8] i'm i'm now doing what i told you not to do i'm 
generalizing over ten focus groups when you [0.7] you're not supposed to do 
that but [0.4] in general the Belgian women [1.0] er [0.6] talked about the 
product and talked about [0.3] you know what they would do with it how they 
would cook it and the sort of image and so on the ideas that [0.5] er it [0.3] 
gave them [0.4] the men [0.8] the Belgian men [0.2] and we had two groups of 
men were [0.2] obsessed with the package and technical details of the package 
and [0.4] oh yeah this is [0.2] gas atmospheric packaging and you know and it 
[0.4] it rises here because there's [0.3] the product is [0.3] you know two or 
three days old and it's giving off some blah blah blah [0.4] and and we got [0.
5] quite distorted results because [0.2] the males didn't appear to want to 
talk about the [0.4] product itself and the image which is what we were looking 
for [1.5] okay that's one example you see they're very static the people are 
very static the moderator is standing there [0.4] and and making notes [0.2] 
now this is [0.7] an alternative approach now [6.1] 
sm0980: would that have been because of [0.7] the people there didn't know each 
other er er they were not comfortable speaking because 
nm0976: i think 
sm0980: although some people 
nm0976: yeah 
sm0980: [0.4] 
nm0976: you you would aim to include people who don't know each other 
in the sort of random sampling [0.5] kind of ideal [0.5] er [0.7] what [1.6] 
quite often when we've done this on student projects and things [0.3] and and 
it [0.3] moderation certainly takes [0.4] a bit of learning and so you're 
throwing somebody in at the deep end if you ask them to moderate a focus group 
[0.6] without having sort of practised it or not done it before [0.7] and [0.4] 
people are most nervous about silence [1.3] and [0.2] you're right to start 
with every focus group is a bit stilted [0.3] and you certainly start by sort 
of going round the room saying who are you and maybe asking a particular 
question of people [0.6] er [0.3] but [0.5] more often than not people get 
talking [0.7] er [0.2] and that that's what you want [0.2] 
sm0981: i suppose in the first guy was speak on like in the experience which 
you had in Belgium [0.6] is that speaker speaking about [0.2] this chemical 
reaction that's what has this [0.3] thing to swell 
nm0976: i-, [0.8] yeah no it does happen [0.5] yeah 
sm0981: your comments then become 
nm0976: sure sure [0.8] but it's the role of the moderator to try and bring 
people in [0.2] and to [0.3] to make sure it's a genuine discussion [0.4] 
sm0982: [0.4] 
nm0976: pardon [laughter] what did he say [0.2] were people taking 
sm0982: [0.9] 
nm0976: er i don't think in that one they were drinking alcohol it's certainly 
[0.7] [laughter] er 
sm0983: er how how do you identify the respondents er [0.3] especially given 
that it's small like a specialistic area [0.8] 
nm0976: 
it's i mean the process that you use if you're working [0.4] there there is a 
there's a commercial [0.4] er side to this if you working for a commercial 
agency then they would use a commercial recruiting [0.6] firm [0.7] er [0.2] 
and how these firms work the one we used in Belgium had fifteen-thousand on 
their panel [0.6] and they were people [0.5] whose demographic characteristics 
and sort of attitudes had been measured [0.7] so that when we said we want 
people of a certain type and [0.5] you know we want people who definitely eat 
[0.6] lamb and pork [0.3] then they could find these people for us [0.4] 
otherwise it's sort of tramping the streets and trying to [0.4] trying to get 
people it depends [1.2] quite often [0.2] we've used er if we haven't used a 
dedicated facility we've used like training rooms in supermarkets or something 
so you've recruited somebody from the supermarket [0.3] or sorry recruited 
people from the supermarket but again [0.4] it's it's a fair question and 
you're trying to get people with certain characteristics and [0.5] recruitment 
is actually far more difficult than running the thing [1.1] 
er [2.1] here's a different example [4.7] hope [22.3] 
nm0976: this is something i want to mention in a minute the guy is handing out 
things to try to [0.7] er [2.4] he's actually handing out things and people are 
about to do [0.7] have a little activity basically to sort of [0.5] er [0.3] 
reinforce the focus group let me just go back a bit and show you [1.1] 
something else [6.9] i just wanted to emphasize the difference of approach for 
the [0.3] moderator [10.9] incidentally those of you who're familiar with sort 
of [0.4] participatory research approaches [0.5] this is this is very much 
related to that and and [0.6] participatory approaches to [0.5] er [0.8] 
looking into particular issues is is [0.2] very much uses these kinds of 
techniques sometimes adapted but [0.5] focus groups or group [0.4] activities 
are very [0.5] much to the fore now [0.7] this guy [0.7] insists on sitting on 
the floor basically er [0.8] and his theory is that you should be [0.6] at the 
same height or lower [0.2] than your [0.4] respondents now i just caught him 
when he was actually handing something out but [0.6] the the Microsoft guy was 
sort of standing there like a 
school teacher this guy [0.5] is [0.4] very much trying to interact with people 
[1.7] just you just have to watch him for a little while to see his sort of 
style [6.7] he's trying to bring someone else in [8.6] i think this is probably 
early on he's sort of going around the the room a bit [13.0] it was noticeable 
that he didn't sit on the floor with the male group [4.5] he basically was [0.
5] chatting these ladies up i think er [0.7] but they [0.2] they certainly 
[laughter] responded and the results were good [12.1] very it's a very good 
facility this very very sort of comfortable and [0.5] as you can see quite well 
[0.6] appointed at that i'm not [0.5] quite finding what i wanted to show you 
[20.6] 
nm0976: you'll see on it we might not find it but you'll see on occasions that 
this guy [0.6] if [0.2] later on in the group where people start talking [0.6] 
at the moment he's going round the room but people start talking he sort of 
stops them and and he's very [0.5] he's very er [0.2] sort of interactive but 
very physical with people but it s-, actually seemed to work very well [0.7] er 
[0.6] extremely experienced [0.6] market researcher [0.5] now the thing well 
i'll just leave it going you can [0.3] keep an eye on it [0.4] er [0.8] the 
final thing that i wanted 
to [0.2] mention was that [1.7] a lot of [1.1] qualitative research is 
impressionistic it is exploratory [0.7] and [0.6] there's a [0.2] a a range of 
things under the title of motivational research [0.3] that can be used to 
enhance [0.7] group discussions of one sort or another and he was handing out 
cards [0.3] where [0.3] i think he got people into pairs to discuss a 
particular topic so it's sort of breaking things up and and [0.4] there are 
various ways of doing that [0.9] er [3.2] so subgroup [0.3] work or or er [0.4] 
small group work is one way [1.4] but motivational research was a sort of 
school of thought in the [0.3] the U-S in the nineteen-fifties which [1.0] took 
[1.0] i mean there are there are lots also of sort of experimental ways of 
doing market research where you set up [0.5] er [1.4] you know er simulated 
shopping experiments and this kind of thing and experimental work is quite [0.
5] common but [0.6] in the U-S in the in the fifties they really got into ma-, 
motivational research trying to uncover people's sort of hidden motivations [0.
5] there's lots of er [0.3] references [0.3] on the web site for that [0.5] but 
[0.2] just 
one or two techniques that are used in [0.5] focus groups and other qualitative 
research to try to [0.5] er enhance [0.4] the [1.5] the er experience [6.7] 
things like [0.6] simply [1.8] oh still leave them going behind there [0.4] is 
just sentence completion test this is [0.5] i think it has two things it 
collects data [0.3] it enables us to collect data [0.3] but it also [0.3] er [0.
7] gives people something to do and it breaks up the discussion and [0.3] and 
if they've [0.2] they've filled in this sort of thing [0.3] they can then [0.2] 
s-, [0.4] sort of carry on with the discussion [3.6] there are techniques like 
this [2.9] and on the face of it it looks a bit [0.2] sort of banal but in fact 
[0.5] this sort of thing can produce extremely [0.3] useful results so [1.8] if 
you fill in what [0.3] namex says and when i've done this with [0.4] groups of 
students they usually [0.4] well there are usually two th-, [0.2] two types of 
responses one [0.4] oh [0.2] stick it into the NatWest [0.4] bank [0.2] you 
know they have a good interest rate and the other is [0.5] go and blow it at 
the union on a Saturday night [0.8] er but [0.4] you get some impression as to 
how 
your respondents are thinking and how they're feeling about things [1.5] 
personification or or er s-, story completion is another one [1.0] now you may 
think this is a bit [0.3] strange but in fact this will uncover lots of [0.6] 
different [0.6] er feelings that [0.2] that people have about food it says once 
upon a time [0.5] woman decided to invite some friends round to their house for 
dinner [0.5] so and so went off to buy the food at this will [0.3] say 
something about who's [0.4] er who's the main food buyer and and whether 
there's any [0.6] er implication about people coming for dinner so-and-so went 
off to buy the food [0.3] they decided to serve [0.3] what [0.3] finishing off 
with what because blah blah blah [0.3] the dinner went very well [0.3] but a 
number of the guests began to feel unwell several had to go home early it was 
because of [0.5] now when i've done this [0.2] in the last [0.4] two or three 
years [0.8] food safety has sort of [0.5] become this big issue [0.2] so loads 
of people say they decided to serve beef [0.4] and it was food poisoning 
probably caused by B-S-E 
well [0.3] [laughter] it's not strictly accurate i think [0.3] but [0.7] quite 
often people put [0.2] you know it's eggs which must have been caused by salm-, 
problem caused by salmonella and so on but i-, [0.3] it [1.8] in a qualitative 
way in an exploratory way it reveals a lot about the way people are thinking [1.
3] and of course this sort of thing is used for [0.5] advertising all the time 
i'll just finish off with an example of [0.3] exploratory re-, research [0.8] 
and this is [0.5] this is not personal experience it's p-, pinched out of a [0.
5] textbook but it this is exploratory research which [0.5] can [0.6] as i say 
it's used for advertising a lot so you you can sort of turn people's answers 
into [1.2] elements of your [0.3] er [1.7] advertising campaign [1.7] let's 
just see what this chap's [0.2] doing if we've got anywhere else [1.3] er [4.8] 
okay see what i mean he gets rather physical and stares into their eyes a lot 
[14.2] right there are three people talking at the moment at some point he's 
got to [0.3] calm this down a little bit and [0.7] there you go [0.8] he 
focuses in on one person [4.2] if any of you are going to do 
focus groups as part of your dissertations or anything then [5.6] he's 
recording the discussion [0.4] he's hearing what they're saying [0.7] 
sm0982: [1.6] 
nm0976: well [0.3] i i thought w-, what i was going to say was when three 
people are talking it's very difficult to establish what each one of them is 
saying [0.6] and and that's another problem [0.8] er [2.9] but he's sort of got 
it calmed down again now as you can see
sm0983: er [1.1] [1.4] 
nm0976: this [0.9] this was just 
sm0983: 
nm0976: this was a static [0.4] camera it wasn't anybody writing anything down 
[0.5] we were we were in another room [0.3] it was relayed to us on a T-V 
screen [0.3] so there was a static camera obviously up this end [0.7] and [0.6] 
it was actually quite a long way away from them they seemed to [0.4] sort of 
get over any fears of [0.2] being recorded [0.6] er [1.4] but yes i mean the 
transcription is after this and you use this as the basis of [0.3] your [0.5] 
transcription [4.5] so just to finish off ideas for [4.8] just just [0.2] give 
you an idea of how qualitative research can [2.1] help with er advertising so 
[0.2] this was a [0.5] an American study of [0.6] er using open-ended questions 
as a way of sort of prompting people and making them think about things [0.5] 
people who drive 
a convertible [0.4] are [0.5] factory workers usually drive most of the new 
cars are when i drive [0.3] now [0.2] if you [1.4] if you are adverti-, think 
about it you're you're thinking of the sort of segments you're appealing to you 
need to [0.4] you want to think about [0.2] how people regard certain 
categories of [1.1] of [0.9] the public and what they drive and blah blah blah 
[0.5] this might have been for [0.2] some sort of market segmentation exercise 
or it might have been to try and [0.3] establish people's responses to a 
particular [0.4] vehicle [0.5] but they were finding [1.8] different responses 
from men and women [2.8] so where the sentence stem was when you first get a 
car [0.8] er this is [0.7] horribly out of date and i'm sure it wouldn't happen 
these days [0.8] women's responses you can't wait till you drive you would go 
for a ride you would take rides in it of course you would put gas and go places 
so it's all about what you'd do with the car [0.9] er men [0.2] you'd take good 
care of it you'd give it a good polish [0.5] you check the engine [0.5] now [1.
0] [laughter] [1.0] er [0.4] as i say i'm 
sure this was a few years back and it probably doesn't apply at all now [0.3] 
but it actually [0.4] resonates with what i was saying about our [0.6] Belgian 
males and females [1.1] er a car of your own [1.7] pleasant convenient say 
women it's fine to have it's nice to have [0.8] er [0.4] men say i take good 
care of it it's a good thing it's absolutely a necessity [0.5] so you get [0.4] 
if you were an advertiser this would be really important and [0.3] let's face 
it whatever you think about this and however out of date it is [0.6] er [0.9] 
gender [0.2] is extremely important in advertising [0.6] you could you can 
watch almost any [0.6] er [0.3] particularly T-V advert because they're the 
most visual and the most active [0.4] you can watch almost any one and if you 
start thinking about [0.3] what segment are they aiming at [0.6] and what is 
the sort of message they're putting across [0.2] you'll soon find that [0.6] 
things like this become very important [0.6] and [1.0] you know if [0.5] it's 
certainly in the U-K [0.7] er [2.2] and i think i mean cars is always a good 
example of this [0.4] but [0.5] you can i-, i'll i'll leave you to 
draw your own conclusion but you can look at [0.5] car ads for things like the 
Renault Clio [0.9] and Citroen Saxa [1.0] and you could [0.3] almost certainly 
identify a gender bias in that sort of advertising [0.5] and same for different 
models so [0.2] just keep an eye on that because [0.4] er [0.8] i can guarantee 
[0.3] that [0.2] almost every T-V advert is backed up by qualitative research 
of some sort where [0.4] the researchers have tried to establish [0.4] the sort 
of basic motivations that people have [0.3] for dealing with that [0.5] vehicle 
or 
sf0984: i was going to say that there's direct correlation between that and 
advertising cars is the new Fiat [0.2] we've got the woman talking about the 
men the man's point of view er [0.6] the man talking about the woman's point of 
view have you seen that one yet 
nm0976: right is that [0.8] i mean the fi-, Fiat have have done a lot of this 
they had that spirito di punto thing for the Fiat Punto 
sf0984: mm [0.5] 
nm0976: there's alwa-, there's often a male female thing in [0.2] car i mean [0.
9] if you want sort of classic marketing texts you read something like [0.7] er 
if there's a [0.2] book called the hidden persuaders i think i've got it on a 
[1.3] on a reference list somewhere [0.6] by a guy called Vance 
Packard which again is about nineteen-fifties America about how [0.3] car [0.3] 
manufacturers persuade people to buy things and and [1.3] i mean at that time 
if you think of American cars in the fifties and the sort of style and size and 
[0.6] and shape of these things they were [0.2] they were making very [0.2] 
definite sort of psychological claims on people [1.0] er [0.4] and where you [0.
5] you know particularly sports cars [0.5] and the sort of [0.3] connotations 
that go with owning and driving a sports car [0.5] which i'll leave to your 
imagination [0.7] [laughter] but er [1.2] you know it's a lot of it would be 
based on this sort of work definitely [2.6] okay so it's conjoint analysis next 
week that's a way of [0.6] designing new products basically [0.5] common market 
research problem [1.3] thanks [3.3] can you pull the blinds up [0.2] thanks
